# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (September 14,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [X] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [X] Gert Grammel
- [] Gabriele Galimberti
- [X] Yuji Tochio
- [X]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [X] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [X] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)



### discussion


* PR#90 Esther completed the review and approved the PR.
Now we can merge the code into the master.Here the issues solved with this PR: finalize 3R model 
(issue #83 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/83, issue #23), 
other update (issue #55 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/55,
#75 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/75,
#76 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/76)



* issue #89
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/89

It was proposed a text, to introduce in the draft, to explain and justify why OTSi information is needed as input of path computation.
"OTSIs is required in the topology model as input to the path computation since before adding a new OTSi it is needed to understand the 
impact of the existing OTSis on the optical impairments of the new OTSi as well as the impact of the new OTSi on the optical impairments of the existing OTSis.
To compute performance it is needed to have information regarding the baudrate, power and carrier-frequency of the different channels in the OMS .
Besides, you also need to know which channels are added/ dropped in the ROADM, to compute overall channel power in ROADMs, in order to check ROADM’s power constraints.
In our model, OTSi is providing this ‘lightpath’ information, 
and is right now the only element that enables to identify which piece of spectrum is occupied by which type of channel (baudrate,power, …) 
thanks to the pointer (YANG leafref relation) with transceiver.
Moreover the knowledge of the OTSi position in the spectrum is also useful in the intermediate nodes to easy the Optical Channel Monitoring in the ROADM."

Igor, who was not present during the call of September 7th, raised the question if there was idea of the magnitude of the number of OTSi on an OMS link. 
Sergio replied that no discussion about magnitude was done last time, but the problem of scalability and the proposal to use instead of single OTSi information, a set of parameters providing an agrregation of information, it was investigated and , even if considered interesting, it was judge too complex and not feasible in short time.
Esther pointed out that for path computation it is needed to consider the OTSi realted to candidate path not the OTSi in any links.
Igor replied that in path computation you need exploring in all direction without tell at priori which OTSi belongs to the best path.
It was said (Dieter) that what has been specified in the topology model are attributes without specifying how to use them, 
that is not possible for aggregate attributes: you need to specify how to use them (which algorithm).
Esther underlined that typically when you use aggregation the risk is to loose information in addition to the need to indicate how to use the aggregation attribute.
Instead what we have in the model is raw data where there is no need of interpretation, no ambiguity.
Italo observed that in principle he would agree with igor about the need fro aggregation but who knows the list of attributes that 
can aggregate information that are provided by OTSi?
Igor replied that he has not the list and the only way to obtain that is to ask optical expert how to have this type of atributes.
Dieter and Julien raised also perplexity about sclability issue: 
Dieter said that if you have already uploaded your network and you do not "get" everything but you subscribe to changes, you have not all the network to update.
Moreoevr Julien substained that we are not talking about control plane and for controller and management the problem of scalability is at different level.

##### Conclusion
At the end of discussion the was an agreement to consider close the issue and then maintain OTSi information in the model.
Before closing definitely the issue it is needed to wait for comments and updates, if needed, for the text to be introduced in the draft.


Sergio in conclusion invite attendees to provide comments to the last two issues introduced by Esther, not discussed for lack of time.
#91 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/91 about RAMAN amplification and #92  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/92 on the need to have oms-element-uid as mandatory no optional.

AP@all: provide comments/updates to the proposed text in issue #89  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/89#issuecomment-918338786

The meeting is adjourned to the next week.

#### meeting scheduling
Next meeting will be **September 21st **
