# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (September 07,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [X] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [X] Yuji Tochio
- [X]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [X] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)



### discussion

Summary of the situation left after the last meeting before stopping for vacations:
* PR#90 for which we need to complete review. Esther already had a look at the modifications and seems to approve them but a definite check and feedback 
is needed before merging the PR. 
Here the issues solved with this PR: 
finalize 3R model (issue #83 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/83, issue #23), 
other update (issue #55 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/55, 
#75 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/75, 
#76 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/76)

* issue #89
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/89

It was first discussed the possibility to have information related to lighpath not with single OTSi but ,
as suggested by Igor, by "deterministic/heuristic aggregates of the effect of all existing services".
Most of the people consider this option interesting but very complicated to obtain, really difficult to find aggregate attributes and standardize them;
better to have raw information.
There is a substantial agreement that OTSi is needed for impairment computation providing the needed information regarding power and baudrate related to channels in OMS link, 
as underlined by Esther. 
Another related topic is to understand if the OTSi information belongs to a topology model datastore or to a tunnel model datastore as other information regarding services.
Aihua suggested that we could put the OTSi-related code as a "feature" and then leave the freedom to use or not in the context of topology model
to avoid risk of duplication of information with respect to what the tunnel module could provide.
Sergio/Dieter/Esther/Julien seems more happy to have for the moment OTSi info in topology model,
considering that nothing prevent in a second time to put this info as optional when tunnel extension for optical impairment would be ready.
 
#### meeting scheduling

Next meeting will be **September 14th** 
