YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (April 06,2021)

****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [x] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [x] Brent Foster

## Review of the minutes of the last call


**Past Actions:**

- [x] **Esther**: to add in YANG text “that the nominal-power-spectra-density applies to a reference point at the input of the OMS” and add definiton for delta-power\
__Closed:__ PR#66
* change nominal-channel-power into nominal-carrier-power (avoid ambiguity with media channel)
* re-add the reference to the equlization mode to ensure consistency among power grouping use along the line
* add delta p (in dB) in the list of otsi.(https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/66)

- [ ] __All__: Need to find a more precise definition for OTSi-carrier-bandwidth.
See slides https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/files/6242460/carrier-bandwidth.and.related.20210329.pptx 
in issue #42 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42) 
__On-going:__ review proposal in the slides 

- [ ] __Action (Esther/Italo/Dieter):__ to review PR#22 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/22) of layer0-types-ext
__On-going:__ Got approval by Esther. Other feedback will arrive.

## Discussion

### github issues review

#### Issues #54,#58:  These issues both require to move some entities (identities) defined in optical-impairment module to layer0-types-ext to make these identities
usable also by other modules.
We agree to move these identities to layer0-types-ext.
- [ ] **Sergio/Italo** : to move indentities related to these two issues to layer0-types-ext

#### Issue #55 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/55): remove transponder-attributes-grouping

- [ ] **Dieter** : to check again the grouping and see if the attributes is already covered by other grouping so that we can remove from our draft

####  Issue #39  (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/39): ask for a "crisp definition of channel"

The requirement to ask for a definition of "channel" is not considered so clear from attendees.
Esther said that is not needed to have a further definiton of channel. We have already in the model, media channel defined by n,m parameters and the carries, OTSi,
carried by it. A digital client is mapped,by inverse multiplexing, into a set of modulated carriers, OTSi ,
that are carried by media channel/s, that for management and control scope can be grouped by Network Media Channel Group (NMCG).
All these entities are represented in the YANG model.
Gert clarified that the question is about whether a "channel" needs to be defined to model the behavior of the edge ROADMs where the carriers from multiple tranceivers,
are combined/splitted into/from the media channel.

There was final agreement that the media channel and the OTSi entities are sufficient to model this behavior of the edge ROADMs.

From a terminology perspective, it has been agreed to use always the term "media channel" to indicate spectrum portion, to distinguish with respect the carrier-bandwidth
needed for carrier/signal that can be hosted in the spectrum.
We can consider closed the issue with this assumption.



## Next call
April, 13th 2pm CET
