# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (April 13,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [ ] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [ ] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [ ] Victor Lopez
- [ ] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [ ] Brent Foster


## Review of the minutes of the last call
### Past Actions:

AP @Esther: to add in YANG text:
- “that the nominal-power-spectral-density applies to a reference point at the input of the OMS”,
- definition of delta-power (in dB) in the list of otsi,
- reference to the equalization mode to ensure consistency among power grouping use along the line
#### Status: closed PR#66
(https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/66)

AP @Esther/@Italo/@Dieter: to review PR#22 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/22) of layer0-types-ext
#### Status: closed. 

### Github issues review
Issues #54,#58: These issues both require to move some identities defined in optical-impairment module to layer0-types-ext to make these usable also by other modules.
We agree to move these identities to layer0-types-ext.

AP @Sergio/@Italo: to move indentities related to these two issues to layer0-types-ext
Addressed with PR#25 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/25

AP @Esther/@Ahiua/@Dieter: to review PR#25
#### Status: on-going

Issue #55 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/55): remove transponder-attributes-grouping
AP @Dieter: to check again the grouping and see if the attributes is already covered by other grouping so that we can remove from our draft
#### Status: on-going

Issue #39 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/39): ask for a “crisp definition of channel”
Status: it has been agreed to use always the term “media channel” to indicate a spectrum portion, so as to distinguish it from the carrier-bandwidth needed for carrier/signal that can be hosted in the spectrum.
We can close the issue with this assumption.
#### Status: closed

### Discussion
AP @All: Need to find a more precise definition for OTSi-carrier-bandwidth. See slides https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/files/6242460/carrier-bandwidth.and.related.20210329.pptx
in issue #42 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42)
#### Status: closed (see below)

There was an extensive discussion on the topic. 
Esther said that to calculate the power-spectral-density she exploits baudrate and roll-off parameters (no OTSi-carrier-bandwidth without clear definition). Gabriele said that OTSi-carrier-bandwidth is the minimum value of spectral bandwidth needed for a carrier, typically provided by vendor specification.
Most attendees agreed that, depending on the taken definition, OTSi-carrier-bandwidth is redundant with:
- either baudrate + roll-off,
- or minimum-channel-spacing.

At the end, the attendees agreed to
- add to parameters:
    - roll-off,
    - minimum-channel-spacing: “the minimum nominal difference in frequency between two adjacent channels" [ITU-T G.698.2 sec. 7.1.1],
- remove from parameters:
    - OTSi-carrier-bandwidth,
    - xtalk,
    - nyquist-spacing.

AP @Gert/@Italo --> to improve the definition of minimum-channel-spacing with respect to ITU-T.
We should underline that the carries are supposed to be equal in shape or , if deifferent, an aritmetic media is used to provide the parameter.

Post-meeting Nokia proposal for minimum-channel-spacing:
"This attribute specifies the minumum nominal difference in carrier frequency between two adjacent OTSi signals
(ref. G.698.2 sec.7.1.1).
The attribute value is not related to the flexible
grid as defined in ITU-T Recommendation G.694.1, i.e.
it is not related to the n or m values.
If two adjacent OTSi signals are placed next to each
other by at least the minimum channel spacing specified
by this attribute, the cross talk between the two OTSi
signals can be considered negligible."

### Next call
*April, 20th 2pm CET* --> it is foreseen to restart discussion on 3R, issue#23 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/23.
Base material:
- https://github.com/younglee-ietf/ietf-optical-impairment-yang/files/3657159/3R-Modelling-02.pptx
- https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/files/5334183/3R-Modelling-04.pptx
