# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (February 1st,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [X] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat



## Discussion

In general, Sergio said all the issues present in the github with label "IETF-113" means that 
a solution has been agreed (text to be added or YANG modification) 
and the related issue will disappear as soon as a PR is done in the view of the new update of the draft.

### Review APs (action point) 

#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: ON GOING
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

To be addressed in the new version update for IETF 113. 

#### AP on discovery: AP @Italo  to add specific issue to clarify how the link between external shelf and ROADM is discovered
##### status: ON GOING

Italo said he will add the issue by this week.

#### AP on term ROADM in the draft:AP @Julien,Gert to recap in a definite proposal the discussion
##### status: DONE
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/26
 The text proposed is:
*  A ROADM maps to G.672's MD-ROADM (w/ implicit "MD"), i.e. it refers to the switching part excluding OTs;
* A WDM-TE-node is a managed entity that may include a ROADM and/or multiple OTs (e.g., an OT-only WDM-TE-node, a WDM-TE-node w/ ROADM+OTs);
* A WDM-TE-network interconnect a set of WDM-TE-nodes. A WDM-TE-network considers also the case of a WDM-TE-node of a terminal shelf, with only OTs.

The text has been agreed and will be added in the update of the draft foreseen before IETF-113. Terminology section could be one of the place in the draft
that could host the new terminology definition. 
AP Dieter: to introduce the text, and with the new PR for draft update the issue will be closed automatically.

### issues on agenda
 
#### issue#69 : Draft text clean-up for "channel" vs. "media-channel"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/69

Sergio explained the agreement reached together with Gert about the text to be introduced in the draft to clarify the meaning of "channel" in the context of the document.
The text is:
"ITU-T G.807 describes a "media channel" as "media association that represents both the topology (i.e., the path through the media) and 
the resource (i.e., frequency slot or effective frequency slot) that it occupies"
In the scope of this draft, we occasionally use the term “channel” to indicate the resource of an MC (i.e., frequency slot or effective frequency slot), 
without representing a topology."

There was general agreement on the text. 

Esther: she has no concern on the text itself but raised a potential ambiguity regarding the sentence related to media channel as representing "the path through the media". Looking at the tree in the model MC and MCG appears on OMS link so no at the end point of the path. 
Dieter/Sergio/Italo replied that talking about "path" does not mean end2end, and you need to look at the OTSi to see the E2E and related NMC as far as
it concerned the media channel.

AP Dieter/Sergio: to introduce a text to highlight that media channel is not related to end to end path while the OTSi/OTSiG represents E2E.

#### issue#92 :oms-element-uid should be mandatory
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/92

It was discussed the comment from Julien who considers useless the introduction of the example since
* either oms-element-uid remains optional and the sentence "some use cases might require [it]" is both obvious and applicable to various others attributes 
in the model (i.e., the first paragraph is enough),
* or we feel we need more justification because we make oms-element-uid mandatory.

Igor pointed out that while the model can provide a superset of attributes not always needed, it should provide a way 
(introducing feature or when/must statements)to clearly identify when the atribute should be present.
So, the presence of the attribute is not an "offline" process between client and server but it would be something inside the model.
Dieter said that the usage of optional means that if e.g. an operator/client is using  this information oms-element-uid 
to create routing constraints to make diversity and the server does not provide the info, you cannot have diversity.
Igor: it is optional form server point of view. 
Esther said that an optional attribute it is something that operators can provide as requirements.
Italo: it is a profile. You cannot have "feature" for any optional attribute. The solution under discussion for the TE topology profile can be 
applicable also to this case
Esther: when and must introduce complexity in the implementation. 
Esther: My preference is to take simpler the model, avoiding when and must statements.

Most of the people seems in favour to keep the model as it is (optional attribute with no must/when statements) and to improve the text without the example.

No real conclusion on the debate around the "when" statement introduction since we had to drop the call due to the time over.

Post-meeting note: Igor said that "if we succeed defining model profiling as a process of negotiating of a subset of optional nodes to be treated
by both client and server as mandatory, a lot of issues could be solved via customized profiles" 

## next meeting: February 8th 2022
