# **YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (January 26,2021)**

****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [ ] Victor Lopez
- [ ] Haomian Zheng



## C+L band discussion  

AP: @Gert to create new issue for C+L band modeling--> closed

The meeting was completely dedicated to C+L Band modeling discussion.
Gert has created a new issue #46 for this topic and uploaded a first proposal in github  https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/46#issuecomment-763498910.

Two other alternatives were proposed in github:
1. https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/46#issuecomment-767499583
Italo proposed a model considering also splitter and combiner modeling, but always based on a list of amplifiers in case of parallel-amplifiers.
2. https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/46#issuecomment-767505281
Dieter proposed instead a more simple model to put optional the L-band, based on 2 containers one for C-band and the other for L-band.

Enrico said there are two way to model amplifiers for C+L band:
1. the splitter and combiner are modeled separately with respect the amplifiers (C and L), in the model we would have  4 entities to consider. We need to consider optical impairments between ingrees filter towards the two amplifieres C+L and the same in output (6 reference points, input to splitter, input to C and L band amplifiers, output of C and L band amplifiers, output of combiner)
2. Abstract model with single entity incorporating the two amplifiers (C+L). You would have in any case two set of parameters (one for C-band and the other for L-band) but the reference point would be two, related to virtual ingress and egress port of the aggregation entity.
 
Esther highligth that we should avoid the complexity of model 1 that is practically expressed by the proposed model by Italo.
Model 2 seems more resonable for a topology model and we would have two alterantives to take into account splitter and combiner impairment:
* to use concentrated loss element, already present in our YANG schema,to model combiner/splitter impairments contributions 
* subsumed these contributions in the type-variety attribute (which will point to a C+L-band amplifier type whose specification defines the impairments of the splitter/combiner stages)

Gert said that in case of the usage of concentrated-loss element we would need to consider separately C-band and L-band loss contributions. 

Type-variety attributes could contains already some of the requested attributes: frequency range of each amplifier type, loss-combiner_Cband, loss-combiner_Lband, loss-splitter_Cband, loss-splitter_Lband.

The meeting agreed that the splitter/combiner impairments are defined implicitly by the type-variety.

Italo pointed out that, even if the splitter/combiner impairments are implicit in the type-variety, a list of amplifiers (as original proposal from Gert) is more flexible than having two containers: this would give more flexibility to the vendors to define the frequency range of a given amplifier in the list (it has been reported that different vendors have different definitions of C and L bands) and allows supporting more than two parallel amplifiers (if needed in the future).

Italo uploaded at https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/46#issuecomment-767559764
the possible model as outcome of the discussion. 

We need to clearly define (in the "description" YANG statement and within the draft text) the reference points where the power attributes apply. 

## Next call
Tuesday, February 2nd 2021 
