Notes from the weekly call on 07-29-25

Attendees: Aihua, Dieter, Enrico, Italo, Gabriele, Julien, Roberto, Yuji

We have discussed the status of both drafts ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang and 
draft-ietf-ccamp-rfc9093-bis regarding the updates needed as consequence of IESG review and comments.

Optical Impairment Topology Yang

We have issue #195 in which it is listed the AD comments and replies. Three out of four AD Ketan comments have been already fixed by Dieter, and we discussed during the call about the fourth comment regarding attributes roadm-pmin and roadm-pmax descriptions. See the comment in the github about the proposed solution . AP to Italo/Sergio to modify YANG consistently with this text proposal.
Moreover there are still 4 older Ketan’s comments that are partially fixed by Dieter, still some work is needed. AP Dieter/all

draft-ietf-ccamp-rfc9093-bis

Italo/Sergio still working to finish the updates required by Med’s review. 
We discussed the comment Roberto sent internally at the group related 
to the inconsistency with previous definition due to the changes created as consequence of one of
the review comment.

The changes was in the wdm-label-hop grouping about the choice :

grouping wdm-label-hop {
    description
      "Generic label-hop information for fixed and flexi-DWDM or
       CWDM grid";
    choice grid-type {
      description
        "Label for DWDM or CWDM grid.";
      case fixed-dwdm {
        choice fixed-single-or-multi-channel {
          description
            "Single channel or multi-channel.";

This is inconsistent with the previous definition of wson-label-hop and flexi-grid-label-hop grouping 
inherited from RFC9093 that use “super” in the same context and that cannot be changed to avoid NBC.

After discussion the decision was to keep consistency, 
removing the super choice and renaming the “choice” in the flexi-grid-label-hop grouping since 
this grouping is not used in any RFC. The wson-label-hop will be inconsistent with 
flexi-grid and wdm label hops because of BC with RFC9094.
