# **YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (February 16,2021)**

****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng



## AP@Gabriele/Enrico to create a list with needed FEC type, with some references for their definition, before to update the YANG and then close the issue.

Related to the above AP Gabriele/Enrico have a list of FEC types but still on discussion and so work is on going.
This is the list, not finalized yet.
-	Reed-Solomon FEC (RS-FEC)
it is standard (G.709 and G.975)
Enrico suggested to specify the encoding e.g.
RS(255, 239) o RS(528,514). 
-	HD-FEC
Enrico said this is a family type with some "children" like RS-FEC che SC-FEC. 
-	eFEC 
reference G.975.1? 
-	SD-FEC. 
It could have different percentage of overhead, 15, 20, 25, 27, etc
Difficult to identify it unambiguously since any vendor specify his own SD-FEC and the Overhead it is not enough to identify it. 
-	Staircase-FEC: SC-FEC
it is standard. G.709.2? 
-	cFEC
OIF to 400G ZR 
-	oFEC
OpenROADM,ZR+

Italo has schematized the relationship among the different FEC types in a hierarchical manner, This is possible with identities without impacing tree.
Dieter suggested to have a flat list and using standard FEC definition. 
Italo agrred on referencing standard only FEC types. Nothing prevent any vendor to use identity to add other proprietary FEC.

Gert raised question about the case of 400G ZR/ZR+: it seems as the FEC emitted at Tx is the same for ZR and ZR+, only the Rx side decides how to process the FEC whereby ZR+
has a better efficiency than ZR processing. 
We need to check if it makes sense to define FEC for Tx and Rx separately or if we consider ZR/ZR+ to be an exception 
and do not distinguish between the FEC applied by Tx and the processing of the Rx.

Since there are a few standard and a lot of non-standard FEC
it would be up for the controller to decide if a standard and a non-standard FEC are interoperable (similar to the ZR/ZR+ case).

AP@Gabriele/Enrico to finalize the work with a definite proposal.

## Discussion on minimum-channel-spacing issue #42
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42

About this issue, it was agreed:

*  that the Gabriele's new definition 
+--ro minimum-channel-spacing?
|  +--ro channel-spacing
|  |      frequency-ghz
|  +--ro available-baudrate
|  |      frequency-ghz
|  +--ro nyquist-spacing
|  |       decimal64
|  +--ro roll-off
|  |       decimal64
|  +--ro xtalk-penalty
|         int32

is in fact not related to "minimum channel spacing" but to the 
bandwidth (portion of spectrum) required by one carrier.

* This portion of spectrum related to the carrier is already considered in the model named "OTSi-carrier-bandwidth".

What is still on discussion:
1. OTSi-carrier-bandwidth attribute is in alternative of the 4 attributes suggested by Gabriele available-baudrate, nyquist-spacing, roll-off, xtalk-penalty, used to compute the bandwidth required by a specific Carrier. A "choice" is needed in YANG
2. All the parameters are needed and useful anyway in the model,OTSi-carrier-bandwidth + the other 4 attributes . 
