# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (June 01,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [X] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [x]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [x] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)


### Github issues review
Issues #54,#58: These issues both require to move some identities defined in optical-impairment module to layer0-types-ext to make these usable also by other modules.
We agree to move these identities to layer0-types-ext.

AP @Sergio/@Italo: to move indentities related to these two issues to layer0-types-ext
Addressed with PR#25 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/25

AP @Esther/@Ahiua/@Dieter: to review PR#25
#### Status: on-going

Issue #55 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/55): remove transponder-attributes-grouping
AP @Dieter: to check again the grouping and see if the attributes is already covered by other grouping so that we can remove from our draft
#### Status: on-going

### Discussion

Basically we have two possible alternatives (the first with two sub) in the model:

* 1b) Use the service function topology model, introducing a new de-facto topology entity, "service-function 3R" and move the list of transponders under the node and provide a list of pointers between the TTP and the 3R to the list of transponders.
* 2) Use the usual transponders list under TTP, and use pointers to two TTPs as 3R functionality. In this case , Italo said, the TTPs would not only provide the list of transponders used by the 3R but TTP local link connectivity would also provide the impairments of the ROADM add/drop paths towards the 3R.

#### Analysis of the options
A set of slides has been discussed with summary of the feedback on the 2 Options received during the week via e-mail.see https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/files/6576717/3R-model-options-v1.pptx

Aihua: He commented about the last bullet of slide 5: he asked how to provide information regarding 3R in the context of path computation since normally a specific topological entity is associated with any elements in a path (e.g. in the ERO). 
Dieter/Julien replied that 3R is related to transceivers and transceivers are already provided in the model with specific identifiers that can be used in the path context. But even in the case the transceivers is supporting 3R functionality only (not also termination) the realtion with the realted TTP is needed in topology model, for optical impairments parameters,that are mapped, as in ROADM, with LLCL.
Model need to advertise transceiver "capabilities" , that can be for termination or 3R or both then a domain controller has to configure the transceiver.  
Gabriele asked about different role on the transceivers and Sergio replied it is considered in the model the need to change role of one transceiver from regen to termination and viceversa, if that transceiver has this double capability.   
Aihua: 3Rs capability presence, need to be known:we could extend the model to permit the controller to have the knowledge of regenerators.
Text to be added in the draft related to the particular realtioship between TTP and 3R functionality.
Julien commented about slide 6, on the statement regarding "common approach" brought by SF model in the view of other L0 functionality (e.g. OAM.. ). Julien said that the OAM common approach is a "possible" , future commonality,to be proven, while the commonality on physical layer attributes between 3R and transponder/transceiver is an actual situation.
Dependency problem regarding SF model has been also discussed.
Basically it was agreed that there is a certain level of uncertainty in the usage of SF model in particular using that in the context of L0 network, since till now, none has used this model.

#### AP for next week
It was decided
* to have enough material to decide how to proceed.
* to query people who has not yet express opinion,ask them to reply via e-mail their position before next weekly call 
* to have a definite position ready for next call so we can start to work on the model.
