# **YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (January 12,2021)**

****Attendees****
*  Dieter Beller
*  Aihua Guo
*  Esther Lerouzic
*  Julien Meuric
*  Italo Busi
*  Gert Grammel
*  Gabriele Galimberti
*  Yuji Tochio
*  Sergio Belotti

## text proposed by Italo on interoperability in the introduction

The text is agreed and will be inserted in the new version of the draft.
Definite text is on github under Dieter's comment https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/43#issuecomment-758043998.

## AP @Dieter Beller:new text to address Esther's comment : closed
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/44#issue-770983252

The text has been reviewed and agreed. Text is on github at https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/43#issuecomment-758057447

This text will be inserted in section 2.5.2 
AP @Sergio/Dieter to clean up all 2.5 text

## Discussion on Esther's new issue #45 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/45#issue-783526467
In her comment, Esther addresses the need to add in the model of OMS link the "port" entity e.g. "to compute the loss of a specific fiber span based on the measured ouput power from the input amplifier and input power of the output amplifier of the span"

This use case seems related to maintenance and fault localization and question is if a NBI topology model with the purpose of path computation otical impairment aware, should deal also with fault localization.

Italo raised this doubt: we need to understand if this type of mapping on the correct port of an amplifier should be part of the topology model or is something internal at the domain controller (PNC in ACTN terms).
See picture in github https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/45#issuecomment-758672449

Moreover Gert raised the point that even adding ports, we should consider that OMS link is at the moment unidirectional only and the model should allow to correlate the corresponding port of the return side.
Gabriele: but the point is to understand if there "is the intention to model an amplifier?" . Gabriele sustained that unidirectional model is fitting well for optical impairments, but not for topology. 

Another point was raised by Gert related to the need to model C+L-Band amplifiers. 
Ahiua suggested that this could be addressed with two logical amplifier (C-bad and L-band).
Gert commented that logical amplifiers assume that the fiber between two amps are modeled as two logical fibers, or to model a splitter to merge the in/outputs
onto a single fiber.

AP: @Esther : to better explain issue and use cases.
 

## Next call
Tuesday January 19 2021 
