# **YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (January 19,2021)**

****Attendees****
*  Dieter Beller
*  Aihua Guo
*  Esther Lerouzic
*  Julien Meuric
*  Italo Busi
*  Gert Grammel
*  Gabriele Galimberti
*  Yuji Tochio
*  Enrico Griseri
*  Sergio Belotti



## Clean-up 2.5 section text 
AP @Sergio/Dieter to clean up all 2.5 text
The clean-up version has been approved. This will be the new section 2.5 in the next uploaded version of the draft.

## Discussion on Esther's new issue #45 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/45#issue-783526467
In her comment, Esther addresses the need to add in the model of OMS link the "port" entity e.g. "to compute the loss of a specific fiber span based on the measured ouput power from the input amplifier and input power of the output amplifier of the span"

Esther presented workflow to explain use case https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/45#issuecomment-762848013

No need to define a port entity but a new attribute "output-power" has to be added at the amplifier element of the OMS link.
Input-power can be retrieved from the value of gain (already in the model) and output-power (new attribute).
AP: @Esther to provide a YANG proposal.

Looking at the workflow Ahiua commented that domain controller seems to act as a proxy towards operator tools.
Esther said it is an implementation issue to decide how to do that. 
Italo observed that from te workflow Operator tool is getting information both from topology and interface models.
If this happen in a single interface some consistency in the identifiers of the different entity e.g. transponder id between the 2 models is needed.
It is a requirement for domain controller internal implementation to be able to map topology identifier with respective interface identifier, but this mapping is not needed to be exposed in YANG as long as the domain controller is using the interface model at its SBI, to configure entities, and the topology model at its NBI. 
However, some mapping is needed if both interface and topology models are used in the same interface.
Dieter/Ahiua agreed on the need to add some text in both interface and topology model to underline the need for consistency in the identifiers of the entities. Naming rules or mapping.
AP: @Dieter is volunteer to propose some text for that


## C+L band discussion  

Another point was raised by Gert related to the need to model C+L-Band amplifiers. 
Ahiua suggested that this could be addressed with two logical amplifier (C-bad and L-band).
Gert commented that logical amplifiers assume that the fiber between two amps are modeled as two logical fibers, or to model a splitter to merge the in/outputs onto a single fiber.

About the need to model C+L-Band amplifier Esther commented about avoiding complexity to model an amplifier not needed for a topology model.
Maybe just using type-variety attribute can be sufficient.
Gert said that with the present model we were not able to have two amplifiers in parallel as per current C+L band amplifiers implementation, and so only 1 optical power (not 2, 1 for any amplifier)can be retrieved.
From modeling prospective, Italo suggest to have, for any amplifier element in OMS link, a list of amplifiers in parallel with all the attributes + the frequency range of operation, to provide band information (C/L) in a more flexible/open way.
Gabriele said that in practice the C+L-Band network would be two different topology for C and L band with fiber in common.
Italo commented that modelling two networks may be an issue in case OTSis of the same OTSiG can be transmitted on different Bands.
AP: @Gert to create new issue for C+L band modeling


## Next call
Tuesday January 26 2021 
