# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (October 12,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)


### discussion

Dieter has created a new branch in GITHUB in the view of the new version 8 of the draft in the context of IETF 112.
It has been review the list of issues in github, to decide which of them can be addressed for IETF 112.
Sergio already added in github new label "IETF112" to indicate which issue can be addressed in IETF112 and
another label "solved with next PR" to indicate the issue implying YANG model update 

Confirmed to be done in the view of IETF 112, issue#42 issue#56 issue#57 issue#72 (with YANG update based the last proposal discussed on Monday September 11) 

Issue#70 : there is confirmation of the agreement to augment the model with geolocation container form RFC8795. 
Dieter has asked if there is the need to put text about that. No opinion from the group, Dieter can decide if text will be added and what text. 

Issue#74 : 
To provide association between two unidirectional link in case of parallel links between 2 nodes and to permit to identify which "element" e.g. amp, fiber etc. are associated in the two directions in case of OMS bidir, we agree to add two attribute
* opposite-link-id to point to link id composing bidir link
* opposite-element-id[*] a list of pointers to oms-element-uid

+--ro OMS-elements* [elt-index]
      +--ro elt-index                 uint16
      +--ro oms-element-uid?          string
      +--ro opposite-link-id**    leafref to link-id
      +--ro opposite-element-id[*] leafref to oms-element-uid
      +--ro (element)
         +--:(amplifier)
         |  +--ro amplifier
         |     +--ro type-variety    string
         |     +--ro operational

One of the possible use case and reason to support the association of opposite direction OMS element(fiber,amplifier etc.) is to allow client's path computation to constrain/optimize path selection to limit to (or use as much as possible) links with shared (bi-directionally) amplifier s/fibers with fate sharing objective in mind.


#### meeting scheduling

Next meeting will be **October 19th**  
