# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (April 26th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x]Enrico Griseri
- [X] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) 

#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: ON GOING
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

#### AP @Gabriele/Sergio to check internally with optical expert the real impact for topology model of the (additional) parameters included in the OpenZR+ specs.
Transmitter

* Tx output power with transmit disabled ?
* Inband (IB) OSNR ?
* Out-of-band (OOB) OSNR ?
* Transmitter polarization dependent power difference ?
* X-Y skew ?
* 
Receiver Opt. specs.

* PMD (avg) tolerance
* Peak PDL tolerance

##### related issue#24 : Model alignment with 400G-ZR
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24

### Closed Issues


### Next calls
- next call on May 2nd 


## Discussion

### issues on agenda


#### issue #107 "Optical protection switching requires additional parameters "
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/107


Enrico/Italo/Sergio: added 1 slide providing the view for two options to model the optical protection. 

Gert provided comment about architectural aspects realted to splitter/selector.
It seems there are implementations that use the ROADM as selector, which is convenient since no additional HW is required for the selector. 
Some ROADM architectures use splitters already by design and others do not. So the splitter (and the same for selector) would either be 
1.	built-in, 
2.	external/co-located to the ROADM-node or 
3.	external co/located to the TXP.

From that, Gert observed based on HW wise, we would have theoretically 3*3 = 9 cases to consider and the question is whether we can reduce that number a little.

Dieter: we need to model OPS protection as property of the transceiver. We should model the connectivity betweeen the transceiver and the port of 
add/drop block without possble details of the link between TX and splitter.
The splitter/selector has to be taken into account just as loss of power, reported in the attributes we have already in the model.
Again, as in the last meeting, people have different opinion about where is the splitter (on TXP, on WDM-node, or separated NE?)
Gabriele: I've never seen the splitter implemented in the transceiver. 
Possible issue in case the transceiver is out of the network because the ROADM does not know where is the source of OTSi, 
we just have a signl coming into the splitter.
How to model the capability of OPS if the Tx is out of the network?
Esther: in the proposal of slide 3, we are considering the case in which you have already OTSi in the network and have OPS for protection. 
We need also to model the protection capability, and the potential impact on the optical feasibility for a new OTSi.
That means we need to add in the model the capability of a given set of ports (LTPs in the model) for the ROADM or for the transceiver depending 
where we place the "OPS function".
We need to properly reflect the splitter/selector presence and association on a given set of ports.

Igor : my preference would be option 2, and the selector could be a separate entity or agregated to  WDM-node,
representing the point where the protection would start.This schema would be a segment-protection.
 
 
#### issue#24 : Model alignment with 400G-ZR
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24

* There was a common agreement that the model is already suitable for any pluggable , no needs to have a specific model to cover 400G ZR+
* ZR+ is specified in OpenROADM , and as such it can be managed as an “MSA” fora organizational mode, 
see section 2.5.2 that already mention for a as part of organizational mode case.
* We need to be sure that this MSA organizational mode can be a superset of the list of explicit attributes. 
Need to be check the list of needed parameters for ZR+ (Gabriele)
* There could be an OTN compatibility issue for ZR+ that has to be verified. This could be an issue in case of 3R. 
Not only for ZR+ we could consider the opportunity to add an attribute to provide information regarding digital compatibility.

In general:
* The model with operational modes seems providing already way to manage compatibility issues
* We should probably digging more in scenario with 3R, but also in this case seems that operational mode could be enough.
* Client information are input of path computation, and are not part of the topology model. We can suppose that other model already provided this information.
* In case of zr+ we can add sentence to specify to be careful about operational modes e.g. you could have zr+-ethernet and zr+-otn
* The way happens ODUflex ODUCn mapping is an input to path computation. Maybe operational mode could be not sufficient. 
AP @Italo to check with ITU guys.

Gabriele was out of the meeting and we decided to wait for him to analyse more carefully his 
comment on https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24#issuecomment-1054238457 
before closing eventually the issue

We went through the comment from Gabriele to understand if we can or not consider the issue closed.
Gabriele explains a bit the difference between the models 400ZR, OpenZR+. Both do not support OTN, as instead is supported by 
OpenROADM with client traffic (100-400 GbE & OTN).

We should add an attribute representing the fact that the same application code support more than 1 line-coding. 
This an an impact in case operational mode is used for transponder (same application code but possible different line coding, no interworking).
Need to define new identities in YANG to represent the different line-coding applicable to the same application code.

AP @Italo/Gabriele/Sergio need to understand how to structure the attribute 



 



