# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (November 23,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [x]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)

## Discussion

### Yang bug fixing PR#96 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/96

Fixing few bugs in YANG:

* use of deref(): fix deref() YANG syntax usage as XPATH function #84 
*--> we can consider closed the issue since both reading RFC 7950 and looking at example 
of the usage of deref() in other modules it seems clear that deref() cannot be used in xpath but just in comparison like must or when.

* otsi-ref within an MCG should a leaf-list
* description of incoming-otsi

* the llc-transceiver list moved under TTP LLC entry from default TTP LLC

#### PR#96 approved and merged 

### issue #92 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/92

After the previous meeting, since most people believe that oms-element-uid should be left as optional, 
the decision was to park the issue waiting for Esther before closing it.

Esther was present in this meeting and substained that there are specific use cases for which to have the glue with a device model is needed.
For example if you have 
several parallel OMS between ROADMS,to specify a route without a name of reference for device e.g. amplifier it would be a mess.
Esther:How to identify the link ? if no geolocation no element-id
Dieter obsserved that the fact to have the possibility to identify elements for diversity could be also not only for OMS.
Aihua: the same for transponder.
Esther: for amplifier there is no te-element
suitable information to convey the needed information for mapping with the physical elements.
Aihua/Italo said that the characteristics of teas-topo (RFC8795) and then of this model (augmented from that) are to have all attributes as optional and 
for any attributes there could exist use cases for which mandatory option should be needed.
Sergio suggested a compromize:
-leave the attribute optional
-add a short description in the draft of use cases for which the attribute should be mandatory

#### AP: Esther to propose some text related to use case.
##### status: open

### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

#### AP #Dieter to propose text
##### status: open


### layer0-types-ext 

We discussed the outcomes from CCAMP session of IETF-112 regarding the relatioship of this draft with RFC9093. The alternatives proposed during the meeting were:
* publish the draft as a new RFC making RFC9093 obsolete that means to replace the obsolete RFC and the new draft can be used alone. 
* publish that as an update and in this case should reference to the old one

Italo: the difference is that in case you obsolete the original one it is needed to put the former text inside. 
Instead for update you need anyway to put all the model (old and the update)but no all the text.

We discussed again this topic and people tend to agree with the first solution:
-*publish the draft as a new RFC making RFC9093 obsolete*

Italo: maybe we can propose the chair to change the name of the draft as RFC9093bis to make the intention more clear also in the draft name
Italo: introduce the possibility to use kramdown as new editor.
Dieter, as editor of the document has some concerns due to the fact he is happy using xml as tool. 
Italo said that kramdown syntax is much lighter than XML. The only problem of krwmdown syntax is the lack of documentation.
However, it is possible to integrate kramdown and github tools: it is scheduled a tutorial from Scott Mansfield during on of the next microwave weekly meetings.

#### AP: Italo to ask Scott to send invitation when the tutorial will be scheduled (probably December 9th)
##### status : open


### issue #91 RAMAN amplification in the model https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/91

Ambiguity if in the fiber loss needs to be considered also the Raman gain or instead separate the two things.

Attendees agree that the fiber loss should not consider the RAMAN amplification gain

Attendees do not think it is needed to add new specific attributes for RAMAN amplification.

Italo: it would be good to add some text to clarify how RAMAN amplification is modelled within the optical impairments topology

#### AP: Esther-Dieter: put some text to better clarify that fiber loss has to be considered separated to raman gain and 
to clarify how raman amplification is supported by our model

##### status:open


### PDL,CD and penalty
Esther introduce a problem of possible disalignment between our IETF model and what has been currently discussed in TIP PSE.
We have a model considering a list of triplet (CD,PMD, penalty) so penalty is computed as function of the two values.
She has shown a couple slides (please Esther upload these on the github) highlighting two things:
- our solution provide a better accuracy
- our solution is more flexible , nothing prevent to use th model with just one value (CD or PDL) and related penalty, considering the other parameter (Cd or PDL) to 0.

Esther asked if exists a publication or example showing the advantages of triplet model that could help to convince the other in TIP PSE. 


## next meeting: November 30
