# **YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (March 30,2021)**

****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
 
## Review of the minutes of the latest call on March 23

Minutes of the call on March 23, 2021 

## Discussion

We reviewed again the slides presented in last meeting by Esther regarding the power.
It was confirmed that we need to have text for the reference point of the nominal-carrier-power/power-spectrum-density and delta-power definition, but there is still a need for clarification regarding OTSi-carrier-bandwidth definition.
Esther said that a measure of the minimum spectral space from single carrier is needed but baudrate + roll-off , that means the parameters to compute the carrier-bandwidth, would be enough and more safe. 
The OTSi-carrier-bandwidth does not have a "standard" definiton and it would be provided by vendor specification.
But from the operator's perspective, it seems difficult to understand the way the vendor is providing this parameter: e.g.if this is a bandwidth defined at -3dB, -6 dB or -40 dB from the maximum or even if different criteria are being used.
So Esther would prefer to compute power spectral density as the ratio between carrier-power and baudrate (not carrier-bandwidth).
Carrier_power could be measured in its "media-channel" (corresponding to the filtering on a ROADM).
A couple of slides have been shown by Enrico/Sergio on OTSi-carrier-bandwidth issue, considering to add minimum-channel-spacing in the model not xtalk-penalty and nyquist-spacing


+--ro Otsi-carrier-bandwidth
|      frequency-ghz
+--ro minimum-channel-spacing 
|      frequency-ghz
+--ro available-baud-rate
|      frequency-ghz
+--ro roll-off
|       decimal64

with minimum-channel-spacing defined as ITU-T G.698.2 as "the minimum nominal difference in frequency between two adjacent channels".

Esther/Gabriel had doubt about general validity on minimum-channel-spacing as defined.
Esther commented on the need to have a more clear definiton of the adjacency of the channels.
Gabriele said that this parameter would be valid with fixed-grid or, in case of flexible grid, only with channels with the same baudrate.

**Actions:**

- [ ] **Esther**:to add in YANG text "that the nominal-power-spectra-density applies to a reference point at the input of the OMS" and definiton for delta-power
- [ ] **All**:need to find a more precise definition for OTSi-carrier-bandwidth
- [ ] **reviewers**:to review PR#22 of layer0-types-ext

#### Next call

- April, 6th 2pm CET
