# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (April 23rd,2024)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic 
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri 
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [x] Roberto Manzotti 
- [x] Nigel Davis
- [] Daniel King
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [] Reza Rokui 
- [] Scott Mansfield

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, 
making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis


### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology


### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis 

### Next calls

April 30th (to be confirmed due to holiday in Italy)


### Discussion

#### Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

For today’s agenda :
* OI issue #169 with new updated text based on Italo’s comments
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/169#issuecomment-2061630772 

agreed text update

* OI issue #145 with updated text based on Ital’s comments
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/145#issuecomment-2068975372

Italo is fine with the proposed text but suggested to follow suggestion that OTN topology model got during SECDIR review related to the part of security
consideration in common with RFC8795, that we also have in the text. Italo will provide a comment in the issue #145 in  github with pointer to the SECDIR review.

* OI “operational” issue found with the new definition of operational-mode as identityref vs string (Esther)

Esther presented some slides to explain the operational issues that, in Orange,
they are facing using the new definition of operational mode as identity. 
She explained that the process to work using identity would impose frequent SW updates both at the server level (NW controller)
and the client consuming the data exposing by controller and exposing it at its NBI.
In both the server and the client the list of identities must be always aligned and updated to allow the client
to expose the values received from the server. 
Any update in the equipment imposes SW updates at a frequency which is too high to be substainable for network operations.
The request is to move back to string type instead of identity to allow the client to pass the received string transparently (as an opaque information)
to its client with no need for frequent SW upgrade when the equipment are updated.
The attendees agreed to the proposal to use again string type ,
but Italo would like in parallel to check with NETMOD if the operational issues can only be addressed using strings or whether there is another solution,
to avoid frequent SW upgrades, which can work with identities.

* RFC9093-bis Issue #81 with details on the 400GZR and OpenZR+ multiplexing. 

No time to discuss that.

* draft-ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-param-yang-10 action plan (Gabriele-Gert)
Gabriele and Gert proposed a plan to refresh and align with other TEAS and CCAMP drafts
the interface-model draft-ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-param-yang-10 that is expiring in these days.
People agreed on the two prosed actions in the list bullet in the sldies 
* Align the models to ietf-optical-impairment-topology.yang and 9093-bis  (Action)
* Address the Tom Petch Yang doctor review (done by Jan Linblad). (Action)

People also agreed to check with Rob Wilton about the question related to the need to augment "interface" namespace or not. 
Gabriele and Gert will provide a first proposal about the two actions obviously they are free to ask help and organize specific 
call to solve issue during the implementation of the 2 actions.












