# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (June 27th,2023)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [x]Roberto Manzotti

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

####issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists,
making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis

####Issue #10 Need for frequency and power range attributes also with Standard Mode

it seems that G.698.2 does not mandate transceivers to be tunable nor to support tunability for the whole frequency range between the minimum and
maximum frequency.
Then *it could be useful to add also to the standard mode the attributes used to report the frequency and power ranges supported by a given
transceiver for a given application code*

**AP: @Italo, @Sergio to to check off-line with Q6 experts if our understanding is correct**

### Closed Issues (from last IETF)

Issue #3 ietf-layer0-types-ext 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/3

Issue #26 Convention for ITU-T Recommendations
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/26

Issue #110 Unnecessary supported-modes level
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/110

Issue #63 Rx optical parameters for alignement with 400G-ZR spec.
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/63


### Next calls


### YANG doctor review feedback

Based on last Yang doctor reply https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/ccamp/mOSVChPuvpWdH24xTvY_0FLKjuM/
https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/ccamp/SgAhvhAvK6JK0M2M2qelbr5zaDE/

We have updated both RFC9093-bis and OI topology model 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/70/files

https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/135/files

Please review 


Need to change the pmd unit in ps for drop and express path.

Esther: instead of polarization Mode dispersion we may need to use DGD (differential group delay). 
**AP:@Esther to check with PSE TIP group when discussion in are finished**.

### General discussion
 
#### Optical Impairment Topology model



#### issue #132 OMS Protection: document refinement
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/132


#### issue #136 OMS Clarify draft text for protection switching for the case one leg has regeneration
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/136

Dieter has open a new PR#138 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/138

There was a discussion based on comment Gert has left in the review of the PR.
Basically he's asking to disambiguate unidirectional and bidirectional different constructs along the new text introduced , 
in particular to clarify "end-to-end MC path" as opposed to "end-to-end MC" which we already have defined in our document.

During the discussion was clarified the fact that the usage of both the constructs in the draft is unidirectional.

About the "end-to-end MC path" it has been clarified that it is not another construct with respect the e2e-mc but represent
the topology part(i.e. the path through the media) while the other component of a media is the resource (frequency slot). 
This has been explained by both Sergio and Italo.

The agreement is to add:
* a definition of "end-to-end MC path", together with the fact is unidir
* clarification with reference to ITU-T about "end-to-end MC path" 
 
With the clarification had during the meeting , Sergio/Dieter will add the definition and ITU-T reference and Gert will update the comments.


#### RFC9093-bis


#### issue #62 Multiple line codings for the same ITU-T application code
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/62

##### Discussion

While it is clear what to do in case of standard-mode , there is for a while a pending question realted to organizational-mode and
if also in that case we need to add a new line-coding attribute.
General agreement during the call was do not add anything to organizational-mode.

Since there were no other pending issues requiring discussion the meeting is adjourned. 

**Post-meeting comment (from Italo not having atteded the call)**:

IMHO, the line-coding attributes are required only when the application code supports more than one line-coding and they could be defined as
optional attributes when the application codes supports only one line-coding

The current model works well if the organization defines organizational modes which support only one line-coding

The proposal is
1) to add these additional attributes to make the model more flexible to give organizations the freedom to follow the same approach as ITU-T
(i.e., defining organizational modes which support multiple line codings) if the wish
2) to make these attributes optional not to impact the organizations which defines organizational modes which support only one line-coding but just give
more freedom

##### Discussion

Dieter: I would not in favor but I can also lieve with the update sicne the attributes would be optional and so if a vendor want to have a single line coding for organizational mode. 
Gabriele: it is proposed an alignment with respect standard mode so I cannot see any harm to add the "optional" attribut and permit more flexibility.

No other comments/objections so the proposal is accepted.


#### issue #63 Rx optical parameters for alignement with 400G-ZR spec.
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/63

A proposed text description is on https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/63#issuecomment-1602950054

but before putting in YANG model, Italo and myslef had doubt related to unit to be used for PMD in both RFC9093-bis and Optical Impairment topology model.

see comment in github https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/63#issuecomment-1607078768

##### Discussion

About the alignment on measurement unit, we have defined PMD related attributes in fiber, in transponders attributes and in ROADM
(for express, add and drop path).

For the fiber pico second (ps) and ps/sqrt(km)
For all the rest ps.

We agree do not add these two attributes since both for PMD and PDL are already covered in the model in the transceivers related attributes
with "polarization-dispersion-penalty" and "max-pol-dependent-loss-penalty"
So, the issue can be considered closed.








