# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (May 31st,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [] Aihua Guo
- [] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [X] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x]Enrico Griseri
- [X] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) 

#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: ON GOING
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

#### issue#24 : Model alignment with 400G-ZR
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24

##### AP @Gabriele/Sergio to check internally with optical expert the real impact for topology model of the (additional) parameters included in the OpenZR+ specs.
Transmitter

* Tx output power with transmit disabled ?
* Inband (IB) OSNR ?
* Out-of-band (OOB) OSNR ?
* Transmitter polarization dependent power difference ?
* X-Y skew ?
* 
Receiver Opt. specs.

* PMD (avg) tolerance
* Peak PDL tolerance

##### AP @Italo to check with ITU guys.

In general:
* The model with operational modes seems providing already way to manage compatibility issues
* We should probably digging more in scenario with 3R, but also in this case seems that operational mode could be enough.
* Client information are input of path computation, and are not part of the topology model. We can suppose that other model already provided this information.
* In case of zr+ we can add sentence to specify to be careful about operational modes e.g. you could have zr+-ethernet and zr+-otn
* **The way happens ODUflex ODUCn mapping is an input to path computation. Maybe operational mode could be not sufficient.** 

##### AP @Italo/Gabriele/Sergio need to understand how to structure the attribute representing the fact that the same application code support more than 1 line-coding.
We should add an attribute representing the fact that the same application code support more than 1 line-coding. This an an impact in case operational mode is used for transponder (same application code but possible different line coding, no interworking).
Need to define new identities in YANG to represent the different line-coding applicable to the same application code.

### Closed Issues


### Next calls
- next call June 14th 


## Discussion

### issues on agenda


#### issue #107 "Optical protection switching requires additional parameters "
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/107

As follow up of the slides presented by Julien (slides 16-17 of the uploaded package) 
we have discussed a proposal to overcome the raised issue.
Jus as remind, the problem raised by Julien/Esther was the impossibility to change the frequency and 
the transceiver-mode of operation  maintaining the same OTSi number also in case of regenerator, 
as proposed in Option 3 (slide 14)
In the proposed solution the model remanins untouched provided that some rules are respected.
These the basic rules:
1. When the 3R changes either the central frequency or the mode, the OTSi identifier before and after the 3R MUST be different.
2. When the 3R does not changes the central frequency nor the mode, 
the OTSi identifier before and after the 3R SHOULD be different unless MUST be the same depending of other constraints 
(e.g. see the case of point 3)
3. At the ingress (and egress) of a given splitter/selector the OTSi identifier MUST be the same. 
4. When the OTSi identfier does not change at the ingress and egress of a 3R, 
the NMC path identifier MUST change (since NMC is terminated at 3R and NMC path is linked to OTSi identifier 
i.e. if OTSi ID does not change you need to distinguish the related NMC paths)
5. The NMC path identifier is optional in case the OTSi has only one NMC path (e.g, there is no optical protection).

For the model we need to move  tx-channel-power, rx-channel-power, rx-total-power
under transceiver part of the tree, while OTSi attributes remains obvioulsy the frequency and OTSi identifier.

There was one comment on the proposal from Gabriele, who said the the proposal could be good but an "entity" 
providing the E2E view of the OTSi is missing in the model.
Italo said that this "entity" is the tunnel (or LSP as instantiation of tunnel) 
but he has doubt on the need to add this information to a topology model when this concept should be part of an extension 
of the te-tunnel model, for which we already have L0 extension (WSON and flexible grid) but not optical impairments.
Sergio/Dieter raised the comment about the introduction of dependency on tunnel model in the case we would decide 
to exploit that as referecne for the E2E OTSi entity.

Time was over when the discussion was still on going.
Please have a look at the uploaded slides and provide comments (if needed) on github before next call so that we can trying to
get agreement how to solve the remaining open points on the subject. 

Post-meeting notes: 

Looking at the slides and the model, regarding point 1 of the rules:
* changing OTSi number can solve the issue to permit the change of frequency but does not solve the issue for the mode.
* The transceiver-mode in the model is under the transceiver and it is correct. 
But if you look at the unidirectional regen,
to change the transceiver-mode,you would need the capability to have different transceiver-mode between incoming and outgoing
otsi, not possible at the moment with our model.
* No problem in case of bidirectional regen 
(you have incoming and outgoing OTSi under the same transceiver related to one segment of the e2e tunnel,left part of 3R 
in slide 17 of the E2E tunnel, the other transceiver of the back-to-back configuration dedicated to the other segment, 
right part of 3R in slide 17,can have different mode)
* Need to discuss if the changing of the mode in case of regen is really required.

#### layer0-types-ext comments

Gabriel has created different issues for any layer0-types-ext provided comments.
See github from issue #41 to #46 
All the issues are in the scope of IETF-114 and have been already assigned .





