# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (November 30,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [X]Jan Kundrat



## Discussion

### Review APs (action point) 

#### AP Kramdown: Italo to ask Scott to send invitation when the tutorial on Kramdon will be scheduled (probably December 9th)
##### status : closed
The team working on MW topology draft within CCAMP WG is planning to move the work on github using kramdown

There are some tools that can be set to integrate kramdown with github and IETF datatracker

Tutorial planned on December 16th at 1-2pm CET:

https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/ccamp/Fykrfzot7HMjZmDxJSgqoWS2D40/

The session is open to anybody who is interested

 
#### AP oms-element-uid: Esther to propose some text related to use case.
##### status: open

##### issue #92 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/92

Text proposed:
"Although optional, some use cases might require that oms-element-uid be present in the topology. 
For example oms-element-uid might be needed to clearly identify a "site" to enable path computation to handle routing constraint associated to this site. The index in the OMS element list might not be sufficient in this case."
and if some example is needed:
"
For example, let's assume 2 parallel links between ROADM A and ROADM B, each with a list of elements 0-5, 
with oms-element-uid a-f and oms-element-uid aa-ee respectively. 
Suppose that the constraint is exclude "site d" from the route ("site d" being in reality the fourth element of the OMS of link 0). 
Without oms-element-uid there is no possibility to convey the required information to identify which link is concerned by this constraint: 
"site x" is also the fourth element of a link between ROADM A and ROADM B. So that it is not possible to apply the constraint.
------>
"site d"
Link-id-0: ROADM A - 0(a) -1(b) - 2(c) - 3(d) - 4(e) -5(f) -ROADM B
------>
"site x"
Link-id-1: ROADM A - 0(aa) -1(bb) - 2(cc) - 3(dd) - 4(ee) -ROADM B
"

Attendees asked to have time to review the text.
They will provide possible comments/suggestion by the next meeting.


#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: open
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

#### AP RAMAN amplification: Esther-Dieter: put some text to better clarify that fiber loss has to be considered separated to raman gain and 
to clarify how raman amplification is supported by our model
##### status: open
##### issue #91 RAMAN amplification in the model https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/91


### PMD,CD and penalty update
Esther introduce a problem of possible disalignment between our IETF model and what has been currently discussed in TIP PSE.
We have a model considering a list of triplet (CD,PMD, penalty) so penalty is computed as function of the two values.
She has shown a couple slides (please Esther upload these on the github) highlighting two things:
- our solution provide a better accuracy
- our solution is more flexible , nothing prevent to use th model with just one value (CD or PMD) and related penalty, considering the other parameter (CD or PMD) to 0.

It was reported during the meeting the outcomes of email exchange among Esther,
Italo and Sergio regarding the triplet model and the issue from Esther that can be cases
where even with mandatory statement in YANG, the value may not be available (eg server not responding),in this case we should avoid strange values and instead 
"null" would be reported.
But the problem is that "null"is allowed only for leaves of type "empty", so to enable the [null] value, 
the type in YANG should be changed exploiting the type union like this:

type union {
  type decimal64;  // omitting range and fractional digits
  type empty;
}

Alternative would be to change our leaves definiton in the triplet to optional.
In both cases the requirement coming from TIP PSE to have separation for penalty between CD and PMD would be reached since with triplet definiton you would 
have a couple of values , if the third would be null (as mandatory) or missing (as optional)

Jan Kundrat from TIP PSE was present at the meeting and reports some doubts on how to use the data with triplet in some example in which only substet
of samples are given creating some ambiguity.
He agreed that the solution with "empty" type could be fine.

Julien commented that what defined here in IETF is data model with general container, we do not define how to use the data the model is providing.

We all agree that it can help to add text to explain better how to use the triplet values.

Jan asked to provide some scientific reference to explain the motivation behind providing the triplet instead of independent penalties.

#### AP Jan: to add issues on github.
##### status: done
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/97

https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/98


### Issues in agenda
#### Relationship between OTSiG and tunnel identifiers https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/87 

Italo commented that in the issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88 
we agree that OTSiG global unique identifierto in the topology model is for OTSi global unique identification but it is not said that has to ontain "tunnel identifier".
One thing does not imply the other.
Attendees agree that it is not an issue.
We can close issue #87

#### External shelf treatment in the model https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/86 : analysis of the proposed text 

no time to discuss

#### Add optical power info on amps in/out ports https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/85: 
add optical power info on amps in/out ports

no time to discuss.
Sergio to send a summary of previous discussion on the issue.

## next meeting: December 14
