# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (May 04,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [ ] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [ ] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [ ] Brent Foster


## Review of the minutes of the last call
### Past Actions:

 
### Github issues review
Issues #54,#58: These issues both require to move some identities defined in optical-impairment module to layer0-types-ext to make these usable also by other modules.
We agree to move these identities to layer0-types-ext.

AP @Sergio/@Italo: to move indentities related to these two issues to layer0-types-ext
Addressed with PR#25 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/25

AP @Esther/@Ahiua/@Dieter: to review PR#25
#### Status: on-going

Issue #55 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/55): remove transponder-attributes-grouping
AP @Dieter: to check again the grouping and see if the attributes is already covered by other grouping so that we can remove from our draft
#### Status: on-going

### Discussion

#### It was restarted the discussion about how to model the 3R functionality.Issue #23 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/23

AP@all: need to study how to model that, and which parameters/attributes are needed to describe OTs relationship in case the 2 OTs are used in 3R functionality

Basically we have two possible alternatives (the first with two sub) in the model:
* 1a) Use the service function topology model, introducing a new de-facto topology entity, "service-function 3R" and duplicate the list of transponders (that have not to be used as termination point of the lightpath but as 3R) also under the 3R service function. 
* 1b) Use the service function topology model, introducing a new de-facto topology entity, "service-function 3R" and move the list of transponders under the node and provide a list of pointers between the TTP and the 3R to the list of transponders.
* 2) Use the usual transponders list under TTP, and use pointers to two TTPs as 3R functionality. In this case , Italo said, the TTPs would not only provide the list of transponders used by the 3R but TTP local link connectivity would also provide the impairments of the ROADM add/drop paths towards the 3R. 

We started to discuss about the 2 different options.
Sergio introduced the discussiob summarizing the two options.
The real difference between the two is the fact that option 2 just exploiting what is already in the model, Options 1a and 1b entails to introduce (import)another model, Service Function model, adding further dependency in the progressing of optical impairment topology model. 
Igor raised some concerns about the option 2,
underlining the need to have a clear topology entity related to 3R functionality while in option 2 we would still exploit Tunnel Termination Point as topology entity sharing "HW" under that, with the list of transponders.
Dieter and others replied that this is not an issue in priciple since transponders in the equipment are typically uses both for termination purpose and regeneration.
Igor also substained that put transponders under TTP is not totally correct since TTP is representing adaptation functionality.
Sergio replied that TTP represent potential  adaptation/termination point. 
Aihua underlined that theoretically in case of renegeration , you would not have TTP at all, so he had perplexity to use transponders under an entity that would not be instatiated in case of regeneration.

As conclusion we agree to provide the group with 2 YANG tree proposal: 
one for option 2 and the other for option 1B.
Option 1A was excluded since Aihua raised concerns about duplication needed for transponders list.
Marking the usage of one transponder in one list would imply to mark as "not-available" the same transponder in the other list, not trivial from SW point of view.

AP @esther/@aihua/@Italo/@Sergio/@Dieter: to create the 2 YANG tree proposals for option 1B and 2.

Post meeting notes from Igor about abstraction use case :One more thing to consider is this. L0 topology nodes do not represent necessarily only physical nodes (ROADMs). 
Imagine an optical network has a "regeneration region" - say, 8  interconnected ROADMs with one 3R regenerator  in each of them. 
When presenting said network topology to its MDSC the PNC managing said network  may choose (for scalability reasons) to represent the entire region
as a single abstract node with 8 regenerators. 
If regenerators are modeled as separate topological elements (SFs), this would be easy to do. 
f regenerators are modeled as ROADM internal devices, this job would be far more awkward.


### Next call
*May, 18th 2pm CET* 
