# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (October 17th,2023)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [x]Roberto Manzotti

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

####issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis

#### Issue #10 "Need for frequency and power range attributes also with Standard Mode"

it seems that G.698.2 does not mandate transceivers to be tunable nor to support tunability for the whole frequency range between the minimum and maximum frequency.
Then *it could be useful to add also to the standard mode the attributes used to report the frequency and power ranges supported by a given transceiver for a given application code*

**AP: @Italo @Sergio: to check off-line with Q6 experts if our understanding is correct**

#### Issue #21 "Review otu-type identities"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/21

**AP: @Aihua: to verify with Haomian if these otu identities are needed and where they are defined (some, but not all, are defined in G.Sup43)**

### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology

Issue #71 Issue tags for developpers 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/71

### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis

Issue #24 "Clean-up groupings used only once"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/24


### Next calls



 
### Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### #120  "Muxponders' configuration constraints"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/120

Aihua presented some slides describing a proposal to solve the issue. https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-flexigrid-yang/files/11530989/Muxponder.Constraints.v3.pptx

No comments during the presentation apart request for clarifications but the proposal seems a good way to solve the issue. No concerns were reaised.
The agreement is to review the slides for next week and raise question if something appears not clear.

A YANG update for this issue has been provided in PR#154 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/154

## Today DISCUSSION

#### #153  "Adding guideline for DGE representation"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/153

The issue contains a proposal to represent a DGE.
Italo asked what was the difference in the model wrt the amplifier and Esther replied 
that amplifier has no power equalization wrt DGE.
Italo asked also why not model DGE as OMS element and in fact Esther underlined 
that ROADM and DGE terminate the OMS MCG and DGE act per channel. Amplifier instead is terminating OTS. These are ITU-T definitions.
The basic proposal definition is to represent DGE as "2-degrees node terminating OMS MCGs".
The basic concern is coming from Roberto who raised the point that in Cisco there are implementation where DGE is provided in ILA equipment.
With respect the previous definition there are then some problems :
* from traffic engineering prospective saying that a DGE MUST be a node with 2-degrees means that some xconnection configuration is needed, while if DGE is implemented as ILA there is no need for xconnection configuration. 
* moreover a DGE as 2-degrees node should terminate OMS MCGs while in case a special development of ILA should represent DGE, this equipment would be a "new" type of OMS element terminting the OTS MCG but not the OMS MCG

As summary we need to decide how to proceed : with the objection from Roberto it seems that DGE should be represented in 2 ways:
1. as a 2-degrees te-node terminating the OMS MCGs
2. as a new OMS element, not terminating the OMS MCG

Esther observed that if we go with this decision, apart the impact on YANG model (need to define a new element in the OMS-element list) , we need to be carefull with ITU-T definition of OMS since we introduce a new OMS element that , if implement DGE, should provide a demultiplexing of channels, that is in contraddiction of OMS definition.

Post-meeting notes:
Roberto provided more info on the ILA w/ DGE solution.
This power equalization solution is not based on WSS filtering + VOA and re-muxing but is based on a different technology that we can call Gain shaping or Gain contouring.
It is a concept similar to a GFF(Gain Flattering Filter) but with the capability to be dynamically configured in order to perfectly match (with some approximation) the gain profile required to achieve power equalization.
Remember GFF works thank to the OCM(Optical Channel Monitoring) that looks at the channels in the spectrum w/o demultiplexing them.
In this new technology implementation there is no WSS involved, the device is not capable to filter any carrier,do not perform any OMS termination, and therefore is also compliant with ITU-T definition.

Roberto think we may need to account for both possible scenarios described in these notes:
•	1 2-degrees te-node terminating OMS MCGs (based on WSS)
•	1 new OMS element (based on Gain shaping) and not terminationg OMS MCG

##### follow up about DGE

During the call we decided:

* to add agreed text "Dynamic Gain Equalizer (DGE) are pieces of equipment that can tune the per-channel power or the power spectral density 
to compensate for variable gain or loss history experienced by DWDM signals during their propagation."
* to add attribute in YANG characterize an amplifier element as "DGE"
* to add PDL at amplifier-element level
* as post meeting notes from Julien and Enrico , we add "delta-power" in the amplifier-element to provide to provide pre-emphasis different from the one provided
by the ROADM
This is the new tree created:

+--ro amplifier-element* []
    +--ro name?
    |       string
    +--ro is-dynamic-gain-equalyzer?
    |       boolean
    +--ro frequency-range
    |  +--ro lower-frequency    frequency-thz
    |  +--ro upper-frequency    frequency-thz
    +--ro actual-gain
    |       l0-types:gain-in-db-or-null
    +--ro tilt-target
    |       l0-types:decimal-2-digits-or-null
    +--ro out-voa
    |       l0-types:loss-in-db-or-null
    +--ro in-voa
    |       l0-types:loss-in-db-or-null
    +--ro total-output-power
    |       l0-types:power-in-dbm-or-null
    +--ro (power-param)?
    |  +--:(channel-power)
    |  |  +--ro nominal-carrier-power?
    |  |          l0-types:power-in-dbm-or-null
    |  +--:(power-spectral-density)
    |     +--ro nominal-power-spectral-density?
    |             l0-types:decimal-16-digits-or-null
    +--ro raman-direction?
    |       enumeration
    +--ro raman-pump* []
    |  +--ro frequency?
    |  |       l0-types:frequency-thz
    |  +--ro power?
    |          l0-types:decimal-2-digits-or-null
    +--ro pdl?
    |       l0-types:loss-in-db-or-null
    +--ro media-channel-groups
        +--ro media-channel-group* []
          +--ro media-channels* []
              +--ro flexi-n?
              |       l0-types:flexi-n
              +--ro flexi-m?
              |       l0-types:flexi-m
              +--ro delta-power?
                      l0-types:power-in-dbm-or-null

The plan in summary is:

-show that we now include the DGE feature in ILAs by using that latest proposal in the version to be published,
-leave the item open for further discussion with Esther and others, as soon as we can put it in our weekly call agenda.


  
  

