# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (July 5th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [] Dieter Beller
- []
- [] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [X] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) 

#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: text has been proposed
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

This is the proposed text:
"additional paragraph added to 2.3.1 Optical Tributary Signal (OTSi):

The OTSi signals in the YANG model are described by augmenting the network and each OTSi signal is uniquely identified by its otsi-carrier-id, which is unique within the scope the OTSiG [see ref to following section] the OTSi belongs to.

additional paragraph added to 2.3.2 Optical Tributary Signal Group (OTSiG):

All OTSiGs are described in the YANG model by augmenting the network and each OTSiG is uniquely identified by its otsi-group-id, which is unique within the network. Each OTSiG also contains a list of the OTSi signals belonging the the OTSiG."

#### issue#24 : Model alignment with 400G-ZR
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24

##### Tx output power with transmit disabled: need to clarify the meaning since no definition is in the OIF IA neither in Open ZR+ MSA documents.
AP : @Gabriele : to check internally
##### status: on going
For the parameter for which there is no reference , as soon as text definiton is ready it will be provided in github (see AP @ggalimba56)

### Closed Issues
There are a list of issues in githubhttps://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues, with label "IETF-114" that will be close as soon as the PR for the required update will be approved 


### Next calls

## Discussion

### issues on agenda

Optical Impairments Topology model
#### PR#111
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/111

Fix #38, fix #109

Added NMC path as per #107
Italo: there is no possibility to report capability of segment protection as it would be our case for not-integrated architecture
Julien: 
Dieter: add placeholder in the draft for protection , saying that is working progress,and adding not detailded text. Problem statement has to be put in the draft. 
Julien: I agree on the proposal

Layer0Types
#### PR#53 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/53

Fix #41, fix #42, fix #43, fix #44, fix #45, fix #46, fix #48, fix #49, fix #50 and fix #51

Transmitter

* Tx output power with transmit disabled ?
* Inband (IB) OSNR ?
* Out-of-band (OOB) OSNR ?
* Transmitter polarization dependent power difference ?
* X-Y skew ? (picosecond)
* 

###### Discussion and AP

YANG modification : add Inband (IB) OSNR , Out-of-band (OOB) OSNR , Transmitter polarization dependent power difference X-Y skew

Tx output power with transmit disabled: need to clarify the meaning since no definition exists both in the OIF IA and in Open ZR+ MSA documents. AP : @ggalimba56 : to check internally

Looking at ITU-T G.698.2 there are cases in which at one application code corresponds 2 line-coding. This would be a problem for IW e.g. in case operational mode is used for transponder (same application code but possible different line coding, no interworking). Different opinion to solve the problem: a) leave ITU-T to deal with that and put some text raising the point. b) use different operational modes c) define an attribute , specifically a list representing an application code with related line-coding as entries. With this option we should define new identities in YANG to represent the different line-coding applicable to the same application code.

About the point 3 the preferred solution is a) , so we need to add some text explaining the issue.

AP @dieterbeller to modify the draft adding the text.

AP @italobusi @sergiobelotti : to add the parameters in YANG layer0-types-ext , grouping common-explicit

For the parameter for which there is no reference , as soon as text definiton is ready it will be provided in github (see AP @ggalimba56)

Tx output power with transmit disabled ? : need to clarify the meaning since no definition is in the OIF IA neither in Open ZR+ MSA documents.
AP : @Gabriele : to check internally 


#### issue #107 "Optical protection switching requires additional parameters "
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/107

Background:

There was one comment on the proposal from Gabriele, who said the the proposal could be good but an "entity" 
providing the E2E view of the OTSi is missing in the model.
Italo said that this "entity" is the tunnel (or LSP as instantiation of tunnel) 
but he has doubt on the need to add this information to a topology model when this concept should be part of an extension 
of the te-tunnel model, for which we already have L0 extension (WSON and flexible grid) but not optical impairments.
Sergio/Dieter raised the comment about the introduction of dependency on tunnel model in the case we would decide 
to exploit that as referecne for the E2E OTSi entity.

For the model we need to move  tx-channel-power, rx-channel-power, rx-total-power
under transceiver part of the tree, while OTSi attributes remains obvioulsy the frequency and OTSi identifier.


Post-meeting notes: 

Looking at the slides and the model, regarding point 1 of the rules:
* changing OTSi number can solve the issue to permit the change of frequency but does not solve the issue for the mode.
* The transceiver-mode in the model is under the transceiver and it is correct. 
But if you look at the unidirectional regen,
to change the transceiver-mode,you would need the capability to have different transceiver-mode between incoming and outgoing
otsi, not possible at the moment with our model.
* No problem in case of bidirectional regen 
(you have incoming and outgoing OTSi under the same transceiver related to one segment of the e2e tunnel,left part of 3R 
in slide 17 of the E2E tunnel, the other transceiver of the back-to-back configuration dedicated to the other segment, 
right part of 3R in slide 17,can have different mode)
* Need to discuss if the changing of the mode in case of regen is really required.
##### Discussion 
Regarding the possible problem to change the transceiver-mode in case of unidirectional regen, it has been discussed the validity of the assumption that no change in the transceiver-mode is required in case of unidirectional regen

Julien: the assumption is surely correct. Maybe in the future it could be a problem if technology upgrade could permit also this change. But for the moment the assumption is valid. 
Esther: I agree on the assumption
Gert had some doubts in case e.g. you have 2 roadm rings in the metro, and transceivers of different vendors are connected back-back. The question is if this situation can be considered a 3R case. 
Julien: Yes it could be a 3R case but in this case you would have two transceivers (like bidirectional 3r)and then no issue.
Italo: Your question is realed to multi-domaon case and for that we had discussion and related issue in the flexgrid github https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-flexigrid-tunnel-yang/issues/15   
Gabriele mention the difference between the case of single network and the one with multi-domain multi-vendor ....????  
Dieter: the interconnection between two domains could be consdiered as 3R but implies different setup and planning with respect single domain, and the case is not realted to the context of our model.
At the end there is agreement to take the assumption that we do not use unidirectional regen if there is intention to change the transceiver-mode.
This assumption has to be added in the draft as limitation for unidirectional regen architecture
AP: to add a piece of text regarding this limitation
Sergio asked Gabriele if he want to discuss about the point mentioned a couple of meeting ago (see above) in which an entity like "protection-group" seems missing in the model.
The decision was to postpone that after the IETF this issue. 

#### layer0-types-ext comments

Gabriele has created different issues for any layer0-types-ext provided comments.
See github from issue #41 to #46 
All the issues are in the scope of IETF-114 and have been already assigned .


##### issue#41
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/issues/41

There is suggestion by Italo to add a "dash" e.g. DP-QAM-32 for readibility.
At the end the definitions have been accepted as they are. 
It seems not an easy task to find a standard referecne to add in the description as required by Sergio.


##### issue#44
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/issues/44

This is the proposal from Esther/Dieter
"OSNR penalty associated with the related optical impairment at the receiver, expressed in dB"
Only 1 comment by Italo: no need to add the sentence "expressed in dB" since in YANG there is already unit statement.

##### issue#45 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/issues/45

It was agreed that the attribute will represent the tuning of the transmitter .
The new description suggested "This parameter indicates the transmitter frequency fine tuning steps e.g 3.125GHz or 0.001GHz."
is accepted. 
There are some further remarks about the name of the attribute , what was proposed is "transceiver-tunability" , but with still question mark for the moment.
