# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (May 28th,2024)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic 
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri 
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [x] Roberto Manzotti 
- [] Nigel Davis
- [] Daniel King
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [] Reza Rokui 
- [] Scott Mansfield

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"  CLOSED
The issue was related  to the case of OT remote external shelf where is assumed that each component link is a single fiber carrying only one OTSi with filters present in the ROADM (WSS) , not in TSP, so no n,m configuration in TSP.  
The decision was to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.

The issue has been closed with the PR#173.
Considering the need to introduce key in the list for BC reason,in the hypothesis to move from RO to RW some data nodes in the future,we have considered the fact that having a key for RO lists is not required but having a key for RW lists is mandatory and adding a key to an existing list does not look like a BC change according to RFC7950.
So the need to analyze the model where is needed to update list adding proper key.

> In the case of media-channel list the decision was to add "media-channel-id" new leaf and add "unique" to flexi-n data node since you cannot have two media-channel with the same flexi-n
> So issue #124 has been closed becaused does not exist the problem anymore.

### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis

**AP:@Italo,@Roberto** to modify https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/files/15222872/layer0-boundary-02.pptx

in order to align the part related to OpenZR+ wwith the style used in slide 3-4-5

**AP:@Esther** to update the profile related to issue#130 

### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology
PR#173 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/173

This PR (approved) is fixing:

* Updated total-loss attribute: fix #169
* Added keys to the lists: fix #167 and fix #124


### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis 
PR#100 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/100

This PR (approved) is fixing:

* Changed operational model to be a string: fix ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang#172

* Added references: fix #6

* Added keys to lists: see ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang#167

* Updated types to consistently use the decimal-2 data type.

* Aligned title and abstract with RFC8776 and L1-Types: fix #99

* Addressed comments from Adrian: see #98

### Next calls

June xxx


### Discussion

PR#173 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/173

The PR has been approved and merged to the master branch.
During the call have been closed issues #145, #169
- #145 : Update Security Considerations
- #169 : I-D text update describing how to use the total-loss attribute for the fiber OMS element
- #171 : Fix references to RFC9093/RFC9093-bis
 with commit #https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/commit/34f2dd92f9418a87c9a62f4ffe96c8a38c4cb5f4

Now for Optical Impairment Topology YANG model only 2 issues are still open.

For issue#130 about mandatory profile for OI applications , Esther said the profile content has to be updated for alignement with the last version of the model.
Esther will update the profile content.

PR#100 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/100

The PR has been approved and merged to the master branch

Roberto presented the slides on Open ZR+ that is not part of the package of L0-boundary prepared by Italo.  [https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/files/15222872/layer0-boundary-02.pptx](https://)  

These are the major points:
* multiplexing of 100G/200G based on simple time division following 802.3 100G spec, no OTN based 
* multiplexing should be compatible with Flex-O-xe (G.709.1)
* no inverse multiplexing in case of ZR+
* no ODU neither OTU

It was clear the need to synch the ZR+ with the other slides (3-4-5) in the package to have the same style and so presenting correct reference point and to understand what is part of L0 and what is part of L1.

Italo and Roberto took the action to complete the deck with 1/2 slides showing the flow as done in the other slides for OTN.

Gert got an editorial issue in the RFC9093-bis model regarding "depandant" vs. "dependent" e.g. max-polarization-dependant-loss attribute should be max-polarization-dependent-loss issue#101 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/101
