# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (April 27,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [ ] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [ ] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [x] Victor Lopez
- [ ] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [ ] Brent Foster


## Review of the minutes of the last call
### Past Actions:

 
### Github issues review
Issues #54,#58: These issues both require to move some identities defined in optical-impairment module to layer0-types-ext to make these usable also by other modules.
We agree to move these identities to layer0-types-ext.

AP @Sergio/@Italo: to move indentities related to these two issues to layer0-types-ext
Addressed with PR#25 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/25

AP @Esther/@Ahiua/@Dieter: to review PR#25
#### Status: on-going

Issue #55 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/55): remove transponder-attributes-grouping
AP @Dieter: to check again the grouping and see if the attributes is already covered by other grouping so that we can remove from our draft
#### Status: on-going

### Discussion

#### It was restarted the discussion about how to model the 3R functionality.
Issue #23 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/23

It is possible to model the 3R functionality as a L0 network service function, which can be modeled by augmenting the SF-aware topology: 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-teas-sf-aware-topo-model-07

Italo/Gabriele/Enrico/Sergio reviewed the draft and provide some comments/question in 
3 slides https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/files/6375906/3r-sf-comments-00.pptx.

Starting from the slides above Igor replied.
Igor: The hypothesis is to consider 3R functionality as special case of L0 switching.
From topology prospective the questions are where the regenerators live, what would be the penalty in the usage of regenerators.
The service function model presents just 3 type of connectivity matrices, the regenerator function should be provided in the augmentation of service function model. 

Dieter: We have not decided yet to use service function model and what is expected is to provide needed topology information to be used for path computation.

Igor:do you see any other usage of topology apart from path computation?
Esther:yes..... 
Esther: An alternative is to use transponder in the 3R functionality as normal termination point(in the model is under Tunnel Termination Point),
terminating inbound connection and originating outbound connection and stitching together at 3R point. 

Igor:special case of connection switching not termination

Aihua: single card with 2 transponders , mode of the card (2 independent transponder or one regen) has to be pre-configured at configuration time. 
Fibers/wires from transponder to client system have to be prepared depending on whether the transponder is used as a regen or a regular add/drop, 
and they are usually not dynamically configurable. When you have to abstract you have already information how it is configured, 
if as 3R or normal transponder carrying client traffic.

Dieter: the card configuration can change dynamically.For example for restoration purposes.
You can have a couple of transpoder in add/drop configuration carrying low priority client traffic that, 
in case of a failure on an high priority traffic LSP, has to be dinamically re-configured as 3R, to carry this high priority traffic, 
preempting the low priority traffic.

Aihua: I haven't seen case of switching configuration dinamically. Preemption is not an usual implementation for optical networks.

Dieter: well, depends. 
Igor: Anyway it is a use case to be considered.

Gabriele: But implies a different architecture with 3 transponders. 

Basically we have two possible alternatives (the first with two sub) in the model:
* 1a) Use the service function topology model, introducing a new de-facto topology entity, "service-function 3R"
and duplicate the list of transponders (that have not to be used as termination point of the lightpath but as 3R) also under the 3R service function. 
* 1b) Use the service function topology model, introducing a new de-facto topology entity, "service-function 3R" 
and move the list of transponders under the node and provide a list of pointers between the TTP and the 3R to the list of transponders.
* 2) Use the usual transponders list under TTP, and use pointers to two TTPs as 3R functionality. In this case , 
Italo said, the TTPs would not only provide the list of transponders used by the 3R but 
TTP local link connectivity(LLCL) would also provide the impairments of the ROADM add/drop paths towards the 3R. 


AP@all: need to study how to model that, and which parameters/attributes are needed to describe OTs relationship in case the 2 OTs are used in 3R functionality

### Next call
*May, 4th 2pm CET* 
