# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (May 17th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [] Aihua Guo
- [] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [X] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x]Enrico Griseri
- [X] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) 

#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: ON GOING
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

#### AP @Gabriele/Sergio to check internally with optical expert the real impact for topology model of the (additional) parameters included in the OpenZR+ specs.
Transmitter

* Tx output power with transmit disabled ?
* Inband (IB) OSNR ?
* Out-of-band (OOB) OSNR ?
* Transmitter polarization dependent power difference ?
* X-Y skew ?
* 
Receiver Opt. specs.

* PMD (avg) tolerance
* Peak PDL tolerance

##### related issue#24 : Model alignment with 400G-ZR
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24

### Closed Issues


### Next calls
- next call on May 24th 


## Discussion

### issues on agenda


#### issue #107 "Optical protection switching requires additional parameters "
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/107

A new restructure package was presented.
Basically the package has been separate into the OTSi modeling and OPS and OMS capability, 
highlighting  the fact what the model has to do is to represent the "existing" OTSi in case of protection since different paths associated 
to existing OTSi may have different impact on the optical feasibility for a new OTSi.

Still question from Gert about whether the splitter is modeled per OTSi or per OTSiG, looking at slide 12. 
Splitters split the whole signal and selectors react on loss-of-light. This suggests that real equipment operates on OTSiG level.
Gert brought up the example of a broadcast&select ROADM architecture in which the splitter is not for a single OTSi but encompassing a multitude of OTSi.
Practically the scenario would be that the external transponder-node sends an OTSiG with several OTSi towards the add/drop part of the ROADM, 
which is a splitter/combiner. 
The splitter splits the signal into two directional WSS which select the wavelength to be forwarded into the OMS. 
This is a common architecture for cheap 2-degree ROADMs but that architecture can also be used for protection by coordinating the WSS operation. 
see Figure 2 at https://www.lightwaveonline.com/network-design/article/16670398/applications-for-twodegree-and-multidegree-reconfigurable-adddrop-multiplexers 
Note that a B&S has a splitter per OTSiG and not per OTSi while the selector (coordinated WSS) works on OTSi level. 
What is the impact in the model if the splitter is modeled per OTSi vs. OTSiG?

Italo replied that he does not see impact in modeling the existing OTSi, maybe on the OPS or OMS capability.

Gert mentioned also the possibility that the architecture (e.g. always in slide 12) could be asymmetric with Splitter outside the NW and instead selector no, 
which is similar to the B&S ROADM architecture.

But there is agreement that from the topology prospective the need is for existing OTSi, no need for switching criteria.

The new OTSi does not exist in the topology.
 Dieter reminded that at the beginning of the work on topology model, we clealry said that the scope of the data model was to describe and 
 represent OTSi carried in any link of the nw, and the related optical impairments impacting on the optical feasibility for the new OTSi.
 
Gabriele observed that slide 11 and 12 present two different scenario from OLS controller point of view. 
In slide 11 there is a single circuit and OLS controller can manage protection inside WDM-TE nodel,  in slide 12 OLS controller sees two different circuits and 
the only thing that can do is to garantee diversity but no association between two is possible.

Julien introduced slides 16-17 on the problem to maintain OTSi number also in case of regenerator. 
Not possible to have different center frequency, mode and also power is impacted in the attempt to have always the same OTSi identifier crossing regenerator.
The discussion need to have a follow up during next call.

#### layer0-types-ext comments

Gabriele sent a list of comments on the actual definitions contained in the YANG module

 Question about Media Channel, whre are defined the n and m parameters.
 Italo: label can contain n,m information. They are in layer0-types RFC9093.
It was agreed to create a specific issue 
"Comment on layer0-types-ext module" , and making the cut and paste of the content of the module with specific comments so that anybody 
can look in the github and provide feedback.
  
#### issue#24 : Model alignment with 400G-ZR
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24

* There was a common agreement that the model is already suitable for any pluggable , no needs to have a specific model to cover 400G ZR+
* ZR+ is specified in OpenROADM , and as such it can be managed as an “MSA” fora organizational mode, 
see section 2.5.2 that already mention for a as part of organizational mode case.
* We need to be sure that this MSA organizational mode can be a superset of the list of explicit attributes. 
Need to be check the list of needed parameters for ZR+ (Gabriele)
* There could be an OTN compatibility issue for ZR+ that has to be verified. 
This could be an issue in case of 3R. Not only for ZR+ we could consider the opportunity to add an attribute to provide information regarding digital compatibility.

In general:
* The model with operational modes seems providing already way to manage compatibility issues
* We should probably digging more in scenario with 3R, but also in this case seems that operational mode could be enough.
* Client information are input of path computation, and are not part of the topology model. We can suppose that other model already provided this information.
* In case of zr+ we can add sentence to specify to be careful about operational modes e.g. you could have zr+-ethernet and zr+-otn
* The way happens ODUflex ODUCn mapping is an input to path computation. Maybe operational mode could be not sufficient. 
AP @Italo to check with ITU guys.

Gabriele was out of the meeting and we decided to wait for him to analyse more carefully his comment
on https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24#issuecomment-1054238457 before closing eventually the issue

We went through the comment from Gabriele to understand if we can or not consider the issue closed.
Gabriele explains a bit the difference between the models 400ZR, OpenZR+. Both do not support OTN, 
as instead is supported by OpenROADM with client traffic (100-400 GbE & OTN).

We should add an attribute representing the fact that the same application code support more than 1 line-coding.
This an an impact in case operational mode is used for transponder (same application code but possible different line coding, no interworking).
Need to define new identities in YANG to represent the different line-coding applicable to the same application code.

AP @Italo/Gabriele/Sergio need to understand how to structure the attribute 



 



