# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (June 20th,2023)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [] Esther Lerouzic
- [] Julien Meuric
- [] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [x]Roberto Manzotti

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

####issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, 
making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis

####Issue #10 Need for frequency and power range attributes also with Standard Mode

it seems that G.698.2 does not mandate transceivers to be tunable nor to support tunability for the whole frequency range between 
the minimum and maximum frequency.
Then *it could be useful to add also to the standard mode the attributes used to report the frequency and power ranges supported by a given transceiver
for a given application code*

**AP: @Italo, @Sergio to to check off-line with Q6 experts if our understanding is correct**


### Closed Issues (from last IETF)

Issue #3 ietf-layer0-types-ext 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/3

Issue #26 Convention for ITU-T Recommendations
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/26

Issue #110 Unnecessary supported-modes level
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/110

### Next calls


### YANG doctor review feedback

We have updated both RFC9093-bis and OI topology model 
following the YANG doctor review suggestion as indicated in the github of issue#133
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/133
and https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/68.

Please review the two PRs #70 and #135: 
* for RFC9093-bis https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/70
* for OI topology model https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/135

see the reply to our update from yang doctor:
RFC9093-bis https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/ccamp/SgAhvhAvK6JK0M2M2qelbr5zaDE/
Optical Impairment Topology https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/ccamp/mOSVChPuvpWdH24xTvY_0FLKjuM/

Need to change the pmd unit in ps for drop and express path.
Esther: instead of polarization Mode dispersion we may need to use DGD (differential group delay). 
**AP:@Esther to check with PSE TIP group when discussion in are finished**.

### General discussion
 
#### Optical Impairment Topology model

Dieter has provided proposals for issues #132 and #136.
#### issue #132 OMS Protection: document refinement
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/132

The proposal is at:
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/132#issuecomment-1597286851

Discussion during the meeting
Gert highlighted the fact that in the figure only 1 direction is shown but the arrows drawn are bidirectional.
Dieter explained that it is true but that was for semplification since in ascii to draw both the "physical links" it is not trivial.
Gabriele suggested to add a piece of text clarifying that the ascii figure represents a single bidirectional link.

There was agreement on this proposal.

#### issue #136 OMS Clarify draft text for protection switching for the case one leg has regeneration
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/136

See the commit for both the issues at:
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/commit/ed3c05a0d6629feaac85f06a9ecf17f8d2d1d72d

Please provide comments by Monday June 26 

#### RFC9093-bis


#### issue #62 Multiple line codings for the same ITU-T application code
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/62

##### Discussion

While it is clear what to do in case of standard-mode , there is for a while a pending question realted to organizational-mode and if also in that
case we need to add a new line-coding attribute.
General agreement during the call was do not add anything to organizational-mode.

Since there were no other pending issues requiring discussion the meeting is adjourned. 

**Post-meeting comment (from Italo not having atteded the call)**:

IMHO, the line-coding attributes are required only when the application code supports more than one line-coding and they could be defined as 
optional attributes when the application codes supports only one line-coding

The current model works well if the organization defines organizational modes which support only one line-coding

The proposal is
1) to add these additional attributes to make the model more flexible to give organizations the freedom to follow the same approach as ITU-T
(i.e., defining organizational modes which support multiple line codings) if they wish
2) to make these attributes optional not to impact the organizations which defines organizational modes which support only one line-coding 
but just give more freedom




