# **YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (December 15,2020)**

****Attendees****
 
*  Aihua Guo
*  Dieter Beller
*  Gert Grammel
*  Gabriele Galimberti
*  Enrico Griseri
*  Sergio Belotti
*  Italo Busi
*  Zheng Haomian
*  Yuji Tochio
*  Victor Lopez

## Action point result

a) Dieter provided some text clarifying "rules" to avoid overlapping in case the same parameters could be provided both in implicit and explicit way.

Gert commented on the need to have consistent behaviour with ITU-T application code. 
ITU-T AC does not consent to provide explict parameters values that can be outside (so more larger) of the range provided by the implicit parameter in the specification.
So it was required to add a sentence in the text "highlighting that in case explcit attributes values are provided in addition to the operational modes including these attribute values implicitly, these attributes values should stay in the range limitation determined by the implicit attributes".

* Dieter will provide the sentence accordingly.


b) For the second action point,
Italo and Haomian provided new text for section 2.5.2 following comment about Option 3, and the need to provide clarification about who can garantee, in case of organizational mode, the interworing as ITU-T is doing in case of application code.

Attendees start analysing the text, with Sergio's comments, but the review has still to be completed 
A new modified text has beed uploaded in github for review and proposed modifications. https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/43#issuecomment-745306084


## Reference to flexgrid and wson model

AP: Victor to create specific issue and suggest text for the draft.

Need to check with Victor to provide text.

## Issue #30 about automatic test

The issue is related to automatic test that can be used to check consistency between YANG model and the tree uploaded in github. The issue is linked  to PR#31 

AP: Esther to provide feedback when PR#31 is ready to be merged and then the issue can be considered closed.

Oscar Gonzales De Dios (Telefonica) is using similar automatic test same based on travis.
These are the github links where it is possible to get info.
https://github.com/IETF-OPSAWG-WG/l3nm
https://github.com/IETF-OPSAWG-WG/l2nm

## Next call
Tuesday December 22 
