Hi,
Some notes form today’s meeting.

Attendees: Enrico, Esther, Gert, Gabriele, Italo, Roberto , Sergio

1.	-Review of the outcomes of CCAMP Virtual meetings: agreement to modify both RFC9093-bis and OIT YANG base on WG LC comment received in WG LC OIT YANG
•	[CCAMP]Re: WGLC for draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang from D.Beller
•	[CCAMP]Re: WGLC for draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang from G. Grammel
2.	After Virtual meeting AD J. Scudder decided that considering that 9093bis needs to be updated, to revert it to WG Document (instead of Publication Requested) and then when it’s ready , after the 1 week 2nd Short WG LC to  put it back in PubReq.

3.	Text related to the difference between max accumulated impairment values (max-chromatic-dispersion, max-polarization-dependent-loss, max-polarization-mode-dispersion, max-diff-group-delay) and the vector of OSNR penalty as a function of the accumulated impairments have been refined by Italo based on Esther’s proposal. The refined text have been agreed . Need to decide whether to put it in RFC9093-bis , where the YANG entities are defined, or in OIT YANG where the attributes are used and a specific section on capability attributes description already exist. (see section 2.6.4) 

4.	The meeting on February 25th is cancelled. The same slot will be used to modify RFC9093-bis and Optical Impairment Topology based on the WG LC comments (apart the updates already done by Roberto). We will go on on L0/L1 boundary during the FlexGrid call on Thursday.

This is the text refined by Italo:
“The model provides information about the maximum accumulated impairments supported by the transceiver modes (i.e., max-chromatic-dispersion, max-polarization-dependent-loss, max-polarization-mode-dispersion, max-diff-group-delay). For CD, PMD and PDL impairments, it also provides the option to detail the OSNR penalties as a function of the accumulated impairments (i.e., cd-penalty, pmd-penalty and pdl-penalty). In this case the attributes reporting the maximum accumulated impairments may be omitted and the maximum accumulated impairment should be listed in the penalty list. In case both are present, there should not be any value in the penalty list above the maximum accumulated impairment.”

Post meeting notes:
We could put the text in section 2.6.4 after this part in which the max accumulated parameters are already mentioned : 
“ The set of optical impairment limits, e.g., min OSNR, max PMD, max CD, max PDL, Q-factor limit, are explicitly defined for the explicit modes while they are defined implicitly for the application codes and organizational modes.”

Feel free to update/amend what is needed.

Thanks
Sergio
