# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (March 5th,2024)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic 
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri 
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [x] Roberto Manzotti 
- [] Daniel King
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [] Reza Rokui 
- [x] Scott Mansfield

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis



### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology



### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis 

**PR#96 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/96 merged at the master branch ** 

Closing 6 issues: 
####  Updated XPath in the leafref for supported application codes and supported organizational modes: fix modify leafrefs added to the *container compatible-modes *when *transceiver-mode grouping* is used in *transceiver-capabilities grouping*. #95

#### Resolved yanglint warnings: fix Check yanglint compilation errors #91

#### Updated data types for max-diff-group-delay, min-Q-factor, available-baud-rate data types: fix type issues for dgd, min q factor baudrate and some reference #94

#### Added new identities for wavelength assignment: fix Adopting new identities for wavelength assignment mechanism #92

#### Cleaned up the OTU type definitions: fix Review otu-type identities #21

#### Moved authors to contributors list: fix Authors on the front page #90



### Next calls

March 26th

 
### Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### #153  "Adding guideline for DGE representation"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/153

YANG update has been already addressed in the context of PR#160
On the base text proposed by Roberto and Italo, an editorial refined version  has been proposed by Dieter for agreement 


#### #145 "Update Security Considerations"

About security is still open the discussion about the rw vs. ro data nodes.
To summarize the issue , in the text proposed for security it is stated that the data nodes in the YANG module are not writable , are readable only.
Gert observed that a couple of data nodes "protection-type" and "inter-layer-sequance-number" are rw. Gert suggested we should consider our OI topology model as "information-source-entry" in RFC8795 representing readable topology information while RFC8795 is also able to modify data nodes adding links/nodes , obtaining a combination of the real topology and what if something is added in the model. 
As stated in the previous meeting we have kept some data nodes as rw for consistency with RFC8795.
The topology models have been defined as rw to support other UCs where the topology information can be written by the client applications and we have defined the LTP protection-type as rw to be consistent with the link-protection-type attribute defined in RFC8795 that we are using to report OMS protection configuration
Both Esther and Italo commented that there are use cases that could justify to have e.g. protection-type rw.
If it is possible to modify protection-type for OMS protection it should also be possible to modify protection-type for OTSi protection using the augmented data node in our OI topology model. This would be a use case justifying the possibility to use writable data nodes also in our topology model, independently of RFC8795.



### Discussion

We did not discuss a particular technical issue , since we just uploaded the new version of both OI and RFC9093-bis.
Looking at the remaining issues of both the drafts we agreed that the only one still deserved of discussion is "Boundary between Layer 0 and Layer 1" #81  https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/81
in RFC9093-bis.
We agreed to have a smaller group assigned to discuss the issue in a specific meeting and propose the feedback/conclusion of the discussion to the rest of the group.
To facilitate the group, we maintain the usual slot also for the L0/L1 dedicated meeting 
i.e. in this case the weekly call is cancelled and the same slot is dedicated the issue.
A specific Microsof TEAM meeting invitation will be sent on behalf of cancelled webex.
The first probable date for L0/L1 discussion is April 9th, taking into account IETF meeting and Easter's time.
A proposed list of attendees of the special meeting is in github in the assigned people for the issue. 




