# **C+L band issue on ROADM model call (March 1,2021)**

****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [] Gabriele Galimberti
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng


## https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/51#issuecomment-786734057

Esther has introduced two issues in the context of the discussion about the extension of the model to C+L band in ROADM.
The first issue is related to the case of a C+L band amplifier with two amplifiers in one band and one amplifier in the other band.
This case can be modelled as two OMS elements, one with two parallel amplifiers (C+L band) and one with only one amplifier (C or L depends where is the second amplifier) (see slide 2 of the file uploaded by Esther).
From the slide you can see that along the OMS, for L band you see only 3 amplifiers and for C band you can see 5 amplifiers. 
Italo asked how can be modeled a situation in which you have 1 OMS element with 2 parallel amplifiers (C+L band) and another combiner another splitter and combiner with only C or L amplifier in the middle. From YANG model prosepctive it would be the same (only 1 amplifier for L/C band and 2 amplifiers for C or L band)but there are the other 2 splitter and combiner.
The issue and differentiation between the two cases can be solved considering that insertion loss for filter (splitter) and insertion loss for combiner
are not represented in YANG but can be derived from the "type-variety" attribute information, that can separate the two cases.

The second issue is related to the mapping between abstract view in our model of ROADM and the possibility to have multiple intput/output ports of the pre-ampl and booster. (see slide 3 of Esthers' presentation at https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/51#issuecomment-786734057)

There is a common agreement that the mapping should be provided inside the domain controller and not exposed in the model sicne that would mean get this information from a device model.
Esther was asking to have a "common naming rule" to map abstract port to the 2 different physical port.
Dieter suggest to add text in the draft suggesting , as reccomandation, how that mapping could be provided.
Other option is to define an additional attribute to permit the mapping.
But question was how you can get it out of the device without exploiting a device model.
Aihua underlined that the text inserted in the draft  would be anyway just a "guideline" not a standard rule.
Attendees decided to have a follow up possibly sharing the text proposed and other feedback from Orange.
Possible date of follow-up is after IETF,
March 15th , 3.30-4.30 pm CET.
