# **YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (December 03,2020)**

****Attendees****
 
*  Aihua Guo
*  Dieter Beller
*  Esther Lerouzic
*  Gert Grammel
*  Julien Meuric
*  Sergio Belotti
*  Italo Busi
*  Zheng Haomian

## Doodle result

We had a doodle to check the possibility to change the slot of the meeting due to some problem of meeting overlapping at the scheduled time.
As result of doodle,it was decided to move the date of the meeting on **Tuesday 2-3pm CET** , starting from December 15th.
We will keep the call scheduled on December 10th

## Polling result

As suggested by Daniele's mail of November 30 "Options 1 and 2 seem to be the ones that received a stronger support and option 2 is the one that makes more sense...
.............
I would like to ask the authors to add some text to better clarify the cases which are covered by the model, or the ones which are not, pick the simplest and most effective way to describe them.
"
We think that the "Raw Examples of configurations" contained in the November 5 minute [](https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/blob/master/minutes/minutes-2020-11-05.md) could be a good starting point.
Dieter is volunteer to add some text clarifying "rules" to avoid overlapping in case the same parameters could be provided both in implicit and explicit way.

AP: Dieter is working on some text 

Italo provided comment about Option 3, and the need to provide clarification about who can garantee, in case of organizational mode, the interworing as ITU-T is doing in case of application code.

E.G. There are interface , like 400G ZR/ZR+ that even IEEE specification does not garantee actual interoperability. 
Gert mention also the case of IEEE specification coherent 100G, as good example to prove our model.
From Wikipedia:"On November 12, 2018, the IEEE P802.3ct Task Force started working to define PHY supporting 100 Gbit/s operation on a single wavelength capable of at least 80 km over a DWDM system (using a combination of phase and amplitude modulation with coherent detection).[16]" 

AP Italo: to provide a text proposal to desctibe the problem.

## Reference to flexgrid and wson model

AP: Victor to create specific issue and suggest text for the draft.

Need to check with Victor to provide text.

## Issue #30 about automatic test

The issue is related to automatic test that can be used to check consistency between YANG model and the tree uploaded in github. The issue is linked  to PR#31 

AP: Esther to provide feedback when PR#31 is ready to be merged and then the issue can be considered closed.

Oscar Gonzales De Dios (Telefonica) is using similar automatic test same based on travis.
These are the github links where it is possible to get info.
https://github.com/IETF-OPSAWG-WG/l3nm
https://github.com/IETF-OPSAWG-WG/l2nm

## Next call
Thursday December 10 

