# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (June 08,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [X] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [X] Yuji Tochio
- [x]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [X] Victor Lopez
- [x] Haomian Zheng
- [X] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)


### Github issues review
Issues #54,#58: These issues both require to move some identities defined in optical-impairment module to layer0-types-ext to make these usable also by other modules.
We agree to move these identities to layer0-types-ext.

AP @Sergio/@Italo: to move indentities related to these two issues to layer0-types-ext
Addressed with PR#25 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/25

AP @Esther/@Ahiua/@Dieter: to review PR#25
Esther and Ahiua have completed the review
#### Status: on-going

Issue #55 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/55): remove transponder-attributes-grouping
AP @Dieter: to check again the grouping and see if the attributes is already covered by other grouping so that we can remove from our draft
#### Status: on-going

### Discussion

Basically we have two possible alternatives (the first with two sub) in the model:

* 1b) Use the service function topology model, introducing a new de-facto topology entity, "service-function 3R" and move the list of transponders under the node and provide a list of pointers between the TTP and the 3R to the list of transponders.
* 2) Use the usual transponders list under TTP, and use pointers to two TTPs as 3R functionality. In this case , Italo said, the TTPs would not only provide the list of transponders used by the 3R but TTP local link connectivity would also provide the impairments of the ROADM add/drop paths towards the 3R.

#### Analysis of the options


#### AP for next week
It was decided
* to have enough material to decide how to proceed.
* to query people who has not yet express opinion,ask them to reply via e-mail their position before next weekly call 
* to have a definite position ready for next call so we can start to work on the model.
* 
#### Discussion

Sergio:Personally,from "tactical" prospective, it seems not a good idea to augment Optical impairments topology model with another further model when optical impairments 
is already an augmentation of a complex model like RFC8795, adding further burden on the understanding from implementers and people outside IETF.
Gert: What about "Ethernet repeaters" practically Ethernet over OTN? Is there any model for that that can be copy and paste, since also in our case it is 
a client mapping over OTN
Italo: Actually Ethernet over OTN is based on the "client signal" model used at the edges of the network to map the client signal over an end-to-end tunnel.
The "client signal" model could be extended for multi-hop client stitching but then we would have the issue to compute the stitched path ...
Igor: the real issue to go on with Option 2 is the "layer violation" : why do not put OTN switch in L0 network?
Julien: Because none asked for that.
Igor: There is an electrical interconnection that is hidden. This layer violation to manage everything at L0, can create problems at IESG level during LC.
Victor: speed up the solution and development
Gabriele: Igor, adopting the SF option, we should review everything to be aligned with SF model. With option 2 we are still aligned with what already done.
Esther: I tried to implement SF model with JSON instance and I failed.Many things are missing. I see many risks to introduce further dependency from another model,
when our possible needs of modifications/updates with that model could not be useful for the other case of usage of SF model.
It has been already long time to discuss 3R.
Dieter: we can have a fair solution, starting working on Option 2 that majority have considered acceptable, but introducing both Options in the presentation
for next IETF-111 and commenting that 2 Options was on the table in the group and Option 2 have been chosen to start the 3R modeling. So we can see what would be the WG view.
Igor: Yes that could be a good path.
People agreed on this possibility for next IETF-111.
It has beeen highlighted the potential risk to change the model after IETF-111 discussion but it is preferred to move forward and investigate the detailed attribute
that are needed for 3R
Aihua: if there are other cases of Layer violation as in 3R probably SF function model can be fine.
So, I'm fine with the path to start with Option 2, but look at possible other use cases in which SF model can be used. 

Esther/Sergio/Aihua/(Italo as reviewer) to start YANG model extension 
Dieter/Gabriele : to introduce new text in the draft, related to 3R functionality. 
