# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (October 19,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)

## Discussion

### Version -08 preparation for IETF112

#### YANG update 
Sergio mentioned the newly PR#93 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/93

The PR#93 is also implying the review of PR#29 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/29 for layer0-types-ext

Both to be reviewed by Thursday this week, to give Dieter enough time to incorporate YANG in the text updated draft -08.

#### Text update

issue #89 : a text proposal is already
here https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/commit/526e7d2af199958b3b0b402d57a9f2a65969c72f 
in the new branch for version -08.

issue #77 : as reported here https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/77#issuecomment-896001705

text is already agreed and to be solved for IETF 112.
Dieter need to check "where" to put it in the draft.
Italo commented that LTP and TTP are bidirectional in our considered network. This has to be highlighted in the text. 

issue #26  : the issue is already there for a while, there is a substantial agreed proposal on the table 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/26#issuecomment-880307429 
and the suggestion to reference ITU-T Rec. G.672 https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.672-202010-I/en about ROADM definition. We need just some time 
to review it and update the draft accordingly.
Gert, Julien confirmed that it is surely needed to conclude the issue, 
that is needed to separate what is ROADM as a functional photonic switching block from the concept of device containing also other hw components e.g. transponders.
On the other hand we have no enough time to review 
text for IETF 112 upload (October 25) but all agreed to conclude the issue in the coming weeks.

**AP @all:** review proposal by Aihua and reference to ITU-T G.672 to find the definite terms and ROADM definition. Comments on github before next meeting October 26th.

issue #91 : we need to discuss how to consider RAMAN amplification in the model.
You need to distinguish if loss of the fiber should be with or without Raman gain.
We can already model RAMAN in the amplifier without adding other element in the OMS link.
Esther/Julien/Dieter said you can just add some text to explain RAMAN amplification without touching the model.
Italo observed that the attributes which are not applicable in case of RAMAN amplification should be optional in the model.
Type-variety could give already indication if an amplifier is with or without RAMAN amplification.
Related to this point, Aihua obsserved that type-variety type could be better defined as "identityref" rather than a string.

YANG identityref permits to have 
1. a syntactic control of the allowed values for the type-variety performed by YANG itself. With the string type, this check has to be performed by the application.
2. the client application can discover that the server supports values for the type-variety which it does not know when the YANG-based protocol session 
is established and not when reading a particular element
3. Two type-variety with the same identity can be defined independently with no conflict provided that they are in two different namespaces.

Note that identities still require some offline pre-negotiatiation for the client to know the meaning of a given identity.

People decide we need to still discuss this point before to fix this issue.

#### meeting scheduling

Next meeting will be **October 26th**  








