# **YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (December 22,2020)**

****Attendees****
 
*  Dieter Beller
*  Enrico Griseri
*  Gabriele Galimberti
*  Italo Busi
*  Sergio Belotti

## Discussion about Esther's comment

Esther provided some comments on the minute of the last meeting https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/44#issue-770983252 and on the new txt provided by Italo/Haomian about issue #43 on "Interoperability with organizational mode" https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/43#issuecomment-748233979

The comment on the minute from Esther raised concerns about possible restriction range used for the explicit parameters of the organizational model (frequency and power range)  
Italo comments about interoperability issue in case you would overcome the ranges provided in the specifications (implicit parameters), saying that in case you would like to go over ranges specified you should use explicit mode, providing explicit parameters that by definition does not not garantee interoperability.
As in the case of "application code" in ITU-T, also for organizational mode, interoperability should be garanteed as long as parameters respect the range in the organizational mode specification. If a vendor/operator want to configure parameters outside of the range because permitted by the HW, they can do but under their responsability since no interoperability can be garanteed.
Dieter and Enrico highlight that 
there are a lot of parameters impacting optical feasibility beyond the parameters related to transceivers that are just the end points of the path.
These optaical impairments parameters really impacting the interoperability that could not be garanteed anyway by a topology model as our draft.
Our draft has the purpose to provide enough information to make able PCE to calculate a path.
We cannot garantee interoperability but we can give path computation the correct inforamation to compute the path.
On the other hand the paramters , like power and frequency, the model can expose explicitly in the organizational mode, have not heavy impact on the general fesibility calculation as other "implicit" parameters subsumed under operational mode value really have.
Italo asked then, if something goes wrong in interoperability, who is responsible for that? 
The answer from attendees (Enrico in particular) was that there is not only one "owner" since the problem of interoperability is not impacting just the transceivers for which you have configured explcit parameters outside the possible specified range, but also of ROADM impact, OMS link (e.g amplifier), so all WDM system. 
It was decided at the end, to add some short text in the Introduction to make explcit that this optical impairments aware topology model does not garantee interoperability and its scope is strictly to provide correct information for e2e path computation between transceivers end points but even in the case optimum optical path is found it is not garanteed interoperability.

AP: Italo to provide some text to add in the introduction

## Next call
Tuesday January 05 
