# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (June 22,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [X] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [X] Yuji Tochio
- [x]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [X] Victor Lopez
- [x] Haomian Zheng
- [X] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)


### Github issues review
Issues #54,#58: These issues both require to move some identities defined in optical-impairment module to layer0-types-ext to make these usable also by other modules.
We agree to move these identities to layer0-types-ext.

AP @Sergio/@Italo: to move indentities related to these two issues to layer0-types-ext
Addressed with PR#25 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/25

AP @Esther/@Ahiua/@Dieter: to review PR#25
#### Status: closed

Issue #55 (https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/55): remove transponder-attributes-grouping
AP @Dieter: to check again the grouping and see if the attributes is already covered by other grouping so that we can remove from our draft
#### Status: on-going



### Discussion


AP#1
Esther/Sergio/Aihua/(Italo as reviewer) to start YANG model extension
#### status: done PR#78 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/78
PR was approved

#### Comments
Esther reviewed the YANG code and approved the PR.
There are some comments left by Esther that have been discussed :
- [ ]  otsi-group is lower caps : it could be good to harmonize -> otsig-ref and otsi-ref instead ?

The group during the meeting decided:
otsi-group and otsi

- [ ] comment regarding the value of "3r-or-tunnel" of the attribute "supported-termination-type"

need to consider the opportunity for 2 modifications:
- a new attribute for the "configured" value of the supported-termination-type  
- a new attribute providing the "association" with the other transceiver in the 3R configuration
Italo commented that before doing the modification need to think about to avoid inconsistency, in the case both the attributes would be introduced 
- see https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/78#discussion_r656077829

Igor has highlighted some modelling issues in case the transceivers of one transponder have different/overlapping set of reachability
(for example a transponder have transceivers 1 and 2 which can only be connected with ROADM degree 1 and transceivers 3 and 4 which can be connected 
with ROADM degrees 1, 2 or 3)

Modelling this transponder as two TTPs (one with transceivers 1 and 2 and another with transceivers 3 and 4) would not allow supporting 
the setup of one Tunnel using transceivers 1 and 3

Modelling this transponder as one TTP would not allow describing the different set of reachability of its transceivers

More discussion is required to understand better the problem. 
AP: Igor to provide a couple of slides to explain the use case.

AP#2
Dieter/Gabriele : to introduce new text in the draft, related to 3R functionality.
#### status: done https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/commit/9803c74dcc8007ebc3c4b3406575b6783a9f50dd

#### Comments
It is impossible to increase the bandwidth (e.g from 100Gb to 200Gb) of an optical tunnel without impacting the traffic. Not clear whether this requires 
changing also the TTP or not.

We need to distinguish the case where bandwidth change requires modification of modulation format or requires modification of the 
inverse multiplexing of the digital client into OTSiG.

Gert commented about the ITU-T reference inserted in the text proposed by Dieter. He said G.680 seems to describe an "optical 3R regenerator" that 
it is not a good reference for back-to-back transponder. Other comment regarding the proposed text pointing to the fact the text apparently ignores digital processing aspect . See issue #81 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/81  
