# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (September 19th,2023)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [x]Roberto Manzotti

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

####issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis

####Issue #10 Need for frequency and power range attributes also with Standard Mode

it seems that G.698.2 does not mandate transceivers to be tunable nor to support tunability 
for the whole frequency range between the minimum and maximum frequency.
Then *it could be useful to add also to the standard mode the attributes used to report the frequency and
power ranges supported by a given transceiver for a given application code*

**AP: @Italo, @Sergio to to check off-line with Q6 experts if our understanding is correct**

### Closed Issues

Issue #71 Issue tags for developpers 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/71


### Next calls
September 26th 

### General discussion
 
#### Optical Impairment Topology model

We reviewed all the issues trying to start making a plan to solve them in the view of IETF 118 and 
with the target to be ready for LC.

About issues
* #150 Usage of "protection-type" for OMS MCG Protection Modeled as 
Single Protected TE-link
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/150
* #151 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/151, 

for which we have already an agreed text proposal, Dieter made the changes under the new branch I-D-14-prep.

We agreed during the call to open a new pull request on the branch I-D-14-prep, 
leave a couple days to review it and then, once approved, 
to merge directly into the master without waiting for new update in the view of next IETF. 

##### Issue #130 "Documenting mandatory profile for OI applications"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/130

Esther and Julien will provide an Optical Impairment profile based on the topology used by Orange 
in laboratory.
Esther and Julien can provide example for OI application by 13th of October.

##### Issue #120 "Muxponders' configuration constraints"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/120 
There is already a proposal in the context of flexible grid. We need to discuss in the flexible grid call
on Thursday if it would be better to add the modification here in Optical Impairment to make 
the updated module feasible for both WSON and Flexgrid NW and not only for flexible grid as in case 
the action for modification would be taken in flexible grid topology.

We plan to review the actual proposal 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-flexigrid-yang/files/11530989/Muxponder.Constraints.v3.pptx
during the flexgrid meeting on Thursday, 
and then come back also with review during next OI meeting.
Based on the last comment from D. King
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-flexigrid-yang/issues/56#issuecomment-1719355854 
the new capability will be implemented in OI YANG module. 


##### issue #144 Tom Petch all comments
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/144
Regarding Tom Petch comments, 3 issues out of 8 have been already fixed with the version 13. In the remaining 5 points,we disussed the decision regarding the prefix since optical-imp-topo is too long for T. Petch.
One proposal would be "oit". Another proposal would be oi-tet, 
but Italo suggested  that the characterization regarding traffic engineering is useful in case like MPLS
in which you can have also the case without traffic engineering. 
There was agreement to change the module prefix to "oit".

Dieter discovered that the update is impacting also the draft I-D not only YANG.
We plan to commit the YANG modification on the new branch I-D-14-prep, 
and then Dieter can commit the modification for the text in the I-D and to create the related pull request.

#### ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis

Sergio reminded the need to prioritize the remaining issues (17) 
since it would probably difficult to address all the issues to be ready for LC.

##### #77 "Review dbm-t versus power-in-dbm data types" 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/77

It is not clear which attributes should use the dbm-t and which attribute should use the power-in-dbm
(or power-in-dbm-or-null) data type.
Looking at the definitions of dbm-t and power-in-dbm, 
there was substantial agreement that power-in-dbm is more clear and preferred definition.

**AP@all**: to review OI YANG module, RFC9093-bis and draft-ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-param-yang 
to check the usage of dbm-t and possibly convert these definition using power-in-dbm.










