# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (January 11th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [X] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [X] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [X]Jan Kundrat



## Discussion

### Review APs (action point) 

 
#### AP oms-element-uid: Esther to propose some text related to use case.
##### status: DONE

##### issue #92 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/92

During the meeting on December 14th , 
people agree on the text proposed by Esther (see https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/92#issuecomment-982489144).
**The text will be included with the next PR for draft update. The issue will be closed accordingly.**


#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: ON GOING
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88


#### AP RAMAN amplification: Esther-Dieter: put some text to better clarify that fiber loss has to be considered separated to raman gain and to clarify how raman amplification is supported by our model
##### status: DONE
##### issue #91 RAMAN amplification in the model https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/91

During the December 14th meeting, together with the text agreed before Christmas
(see https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/91#issuecomment-993636135)
it was decided to add a piece of text explicitly saying that the model is supporting counter-propagating pump only and not co-propagating raman pump. 

Dieter has updated section 2.4 addressing also this point. 
see https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/91#issuecomment-1007494561

**The text has been agreed and the issue will be closed accordingly  with the next PR updating the draft.** 


### discussed issues

#### issue#86 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/86

As reported in the last minute of December 14th, there was agreement to ad the text suggested by Esther:
"The impairments related to the link between remote optical transponders located in a different shelf from the ROADM itself,
can also be modelled using the same optical impairments as those defined for a link between ROADMs (OMS)."
Moreover another piece of text was suggested last meeting by Igor:
* "in the scenario the external shelf can be considered as TE-node with termination capability only (not switching)
* the external shelf is under the control of the same controller as the ROADM"

During the meeting some concerns were raised about the second bullets reported above.

Esther/Julien/Gert consider the usage of one or more controllers as architecural aspect as outside the scope of a topology model. 
Julien said that in the topology model we can think to have something that permit to consider single topology independently on how the link between ROADM and external shelf
is discovered.
The discovery is not part of topology model.

Gert said that we should not talk about single or multiple controllers but ,if anything, about "same administrative domain" or not.

Gabriele regarding the scenario of external shelf, underlined that in reality the use cases are 4:
1. co-located TXP integrated in OLS (as single NE)
2. co-located not-integrated in OLS (two NEs)
3. remote (far-end) TXP integrated in OLS (as single NE)
4. remote (far-end) TXP not integrated in OLS (two NEs)

Cases 1 and 3 are surely under the same domain.
The caes 2,4 could be in principle belong to different domains, but this sub-case is more related probably to a Packet over Optical Integration draft 
than optical impairments topology.

Italo said that if the external shelf and ROADM can be controlled by the same controller, 
this controller can discover the link adjacency in between by mechanisms which are outside the scope of our work and report the external shelf, 
the ROADM and the links between them within the same topology.

There was agreement to consider the case where the external shelf, the ROADM and the links between them belong to the same topology, 
regardless of the controller architecture used to build this topology.
People agrees to consider closed this issue with proposed text and to create a separate issue about discovering.

**AP @Italo  to add specific issue to clarify how the link between external shelf and ROADM is discovered**


#### convergence between layer0-types-ext and interface model

Gabriele: asking to have a specific meeting to discuss convergence between interface model and Layer0-types-ext

AP @Gabriele to organize related meeting


## next meeting: January 18th 2022
