# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (January 18th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [X] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [X] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat



## Discussion

### Review APs (action point) 



#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: ON GOING
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

To be addressed in the new version update for IETF 113. 

#### AP on discovery: AP @Italo  to add specific issue to clarify how the link between external shelf and ROADM is discovered
##### status: ON GOING

Italo said he will add the issue by this week.

### issues on agenda



#### issue#99 "Use union type with empty type to enable "[null]" correct answer in case 
a mandatory data is not available" https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/99

In case mandatory data are not present in the topology instance,in order to avoid unspecified behaviour, 
Esther is proposing to use explicitly the empty type, so that if a mandatory data is not found the response should be of the empty type eg "[null]" for json case [RFC7951].
This means that all our types (with mandatory true) should be union with the empty type like this code:

```
type union {
  type decimal64;  // omitting range and fractional digits
  type empty;
}
```

Moreover Esther is proposing to use empty type also in some cases for optional attributes.

Italo: that means that when an optional attribute is not applicable it will not be present in the datastore . 
If the attribute is applicable but its value is not known, the attubute will be reported as null value. I would suggest to clarify this interpretation in the draft.

Is agreed to introduce the empty type for most of the attribute.

Add it everywhere when is possible and discuss if there are few exceptions (e.g. not for the keys in the list) 

AP @sergio,Italo and Esther: to provide text clarification about the usage of "empty" type for optional" attribute

#### issue#100 "Add more line-coding identities" https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/100

Esther is proposing to add line-coding since for the moment only legacy line-codings are present .
Need to add some more to cover other rates i.e. 100G,200G,300G,400G

Italo: there is no ITU-T Rec. defining line-coding beyond 100G, see G.698.2

Esther: what is needed to define are new rates, while line-coding is more that that.

Italo:We can introduce a new attribute just for bit rate.
When we need more than line rate (e.g. modulation format) we will use line coding and in this case we can provide just the standard ones.
Since the line-coding is an identity, vendors can define the identities for their own proprietary ling-coding definitions.

Italo raised the question if we should cancel the line-coding present in the model(that are just referring to legacy non-coherent signals)
if the model should deal with "coherent" technology only. 

Eshter: there could be some cases for which mixed NW (legacy and coherent) can be present.

Gabriele said that some customer happen to ask for migrating scenario from legacy to coherent in which you can have transient situation of mixing network.

In case the model should manage also legacy NW, there would be need to consider other parameters: 
in not-coherent NW dispersion compensation is done by amplifier not by transceivers as in case of coherent.
The algorithms for path computation are different in coherent and not-coherent but with topology model we do not need to consider algorithm
but just providing the correct and needed information.

Gert: my suggestion is that it would be much better to stay with coherent only.

Gert asked: Assuming a 100GPAM4 transceiver (100G but not coherent). Do we have a way to distinguish it sufficiently from a 100G-coherent transceiver
and understand it is not applicable to the topology model, because it is not coherent?

Italo replied that , yes, we have a way, since line coding is not limited to the line rate, for example the modulation would be different and 
the 100G coherent would probably be named “coherent-… or OTL4.4 or something along those lines.
We can also exploit YANG hierarchical capability in the "identities" to filter the coherent-only line coding use the same identity base "coherent". 

The attendees agree to consider the model as managing coherent NW only.
We do not cancel the line coding present in the model even if not related to coherent technology, 
since they are defined in l0-types-ext and could be needed by other models.


#### convergence between layer0-types-ext and interface model

Gabriele: asking to have a specific meeting to discuss convergence between interface model and Layer0-types-ext

AP @Gabriele to organize related meeting
status : done


## next meeting: January 25th 2022
