# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (November 29th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [x] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) 



### Closed Issues


### Next calls
December 6th 

### issues on agenda

#### OMS protection 

Gert: what type of OMS protection? if dual-end you would need to consider also the APS protocol.
Dieter: for a topology model you do not need to take into account the protection functionality but just reporting the inforamtion needed for path computation, 
and so the fact a link is protected or not. 
Italo: we can consider two cases:  
* you can exploit just the link protection of teas-topo and reporting the worst OI parameters from the two underlying primary and secondary link. 
The process to report the worst OI parameters from the two underlying link is out of scope of the model, it is in the "brain" of the controller. 
The OI of the protected OMS link and of the protected ROADM path should be abstracted by the controller(e.g., by reporting the worst case scenario)
* you expose 3 links 1 protected link, 2 underlying links primary/secondary and you can use the underlay container of teas-topo to associate the protected link
with the 2 underlying paths. And you report the OI related to the 2 underlying paths. 

Julien: you can report only the working path
Dieter: for path computation to do optical feasibility,you could report only the worst case between the two link 
Julien: over long haul OMS protection ...?

This is the reference part of teas-topo:

     augment /nw:networks/nw:network/nt:link:
       +--rw te!
          ................................................
          +--rw te-link-attributes
          | ..............................................
          |  +--rw underlay {te-topology-hierarchy}?
          |  |  +--rw enabled?                     boolean
          |  |  +--rw primary-path
          |  |  |  .......................................
          |  |  +--rw backup-path* [index]
          |  |  |  +--rw index           uint32
          |  |  |  .......................................
          | ..............................................
          |  +--rw link-protection-type?             identityref
          | ..............................................
          ................................................













