# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (September 26th,2023)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [] Julien Meuric
- [] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [x]Roberto Manzotti

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

####issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from 
the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have
2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) 
to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. 
See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis

#### Issue #10 Need for frequency and power range attributes also with Standard Mode

it seems that G.698.2 does not mandate transceivers to be tunable nor to support tunability 
for the whole frequency range between the minimum and maximum frequency.
Then *it could be useful to add also to the standard mode the attributes used to report the frequency and power ranges supported by a given transceiver for a given application code*

**AP: @Italo, @Sergio to to check off-line with Q6 experts if our understanding is correct**

##### Issue #77 "Review dbm-t versus power-in-dbm data types"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/77

**AP: @all to review OI YANG module, RFC9093-bis and draft-ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-param-yang to check 
the usage of dbm-t and possibly convert these definition using power-in-dbm.** 

All the "power" attributes in RFC9093-bis have "dbm-t" as type.
In draft-ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-param-yang-09 , 
```+--rw channel-output-power?             dbm-t```
```+--ro channel-input-power?              dbm-t```
```+--ro total-input-power?                dbm-t```

**closed**

### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology

Issue #71 Issue tags for developpers 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/71

### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis

Issue #24 "Clean-up groupings used only once"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/24


### Next calls
October 3rd 

## General discussion
 
### Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### #120  "Muxponders' configuration constraints"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/120

Aihua presented some slides describing a proposal to solve the issue.
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-flexigrid-yang/files/11530989/Muxponder.Constraints.v3.pptx

No comments during the presentation apart reuest for clarifications but the proposal seems a good way
to solve the issue. No concerns were reaised.
The agreement is to review the slides for next week and raise question if something appears not clear.


### ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis
We reviewed some of the issues related to RFC9093-bis trying to start making a plan to solve them in the
view of IETF 118 and with the target to be ready for LC

#### issue #76 "FEC types without references"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/76

We agree during the call to delete the FEC type not referenced.

#### issue #77 "Review dbm-t versus power-in-dbm data types"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/77

Following the AP (above) Sergio checked RFC9093-bis, OI Topology and 
draft-ietf-ccamp-dwdm-if-param-yang and found that all attributes related to power are defined
with dbm-t. 
The agreement was to substitute all these "type" definitions with "power-in-dbm"

#### #75 Examples of how vendors can define their operational modes 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/75

We need to work on this, Dieter/Sergio/Italo to provide some text and create an example to be put in
an appendix.

#### #69 "Try to shorten the names of attributes"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/69

#### #65 "pyang tree length issue"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/65

#### #64 Downrefs  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/64 

The issue could be solved just putting "Informative reference" instead of "normative reference". 
The solution is agreed

####  #21 "Review otu-type identities"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/21

AP @Aihua: to verify with Haomian if these otu identities are needed and where they are defined
(some, but not all, are defined in G.Sup43)

#### #33 "Label encoding w/ branching"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/33

Esther/Aihua: suggested to add "min-elements" statement to the list under the "super" branch,
imposing a constraints that avoids to use the list for single element (then for single-channel).
Post-meeting notes:
Sergio: to do that a new grouping , a copy of "flex-grid-label-hop" with "min-elements" 
statement has to be defined since per backward compatibility we cannot modify the original grouping 
(defined in RFC9093).

```
grouping tbd {
    description
      "Generic label-hop information for flexi-grid";
    choice single-or-super-channel {
      description
        "single or super channel";
      case single {
        uses flexi-grid-frequency-slot;
      }
      case super {
        list subcarrier-flexi-n {
          key "flexi-n";
          uses flexi-grid-frequency-slot;
          min-elements 2;
          description
            "List of subcarrier channels for flexi-grid super
             channel.";
        }
      }
    }
    reference
      "RFC 7698: Framework and Requirements for GMPLS-Based Control
       of Flexi-Grid Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM)
       Networks";
  }```
  
