# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (May 7th,2024)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [] Esther Lerouzic 
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri 
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [x] Roberto Manzotti 
- [x] Nigel Davis
- [] Daniel King
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [] Reza Rokui 
- [] Scott Mansfield

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis


### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology
PR#173 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/173

This PR (still to be approved) is fixing:

* Updated total-loss attribute: fix #169
* Added keys to the lists: fix #167 and fix #124


### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis 
PR#100 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/100

This PR (still not approved) is fixing:

* Changed operational model to be a string: fix ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang#172

* Added references: fix #6

* Added keys to lists: see ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang#167

* Updated types to consistently use the decimal-2 data type.

* Aligned title and abstract with RFC8776 and L1-Types: fix #99

* Addressed comments from Adrian: see #98

### Next calls

May 14th


### Discussion

#### Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

New PR#173 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/173



#### RFC9093-bis

New PR#100 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/100

For both PR the decision was to discuss the pending issue reported in github related to the two PR in the next call 
when a sufficient level of attendance of the meeting is foreseen to be reached.

Gert made a comment realted to the new definiton of operational-mode that has been reproted back to "string".
Now Gert's perplexity was the risk to have operational-mode definition too long.
Gert proposed to think about the possibility to put a restriction lenght to operationaòl-mode definition.
We need to tke into account that as reproted in RFC7950, a built-in string has no limitation. 



