# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (February 8th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat



## Discussion


### Review APs (action point) 

#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: ON GOING
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

To be addressed in the new version update for IETF 113. 

#### AP on discovery: AP @Italo  to add specific issue to clarify how the link between external shelf and ROADM is discovered
##### status: ON GOING

Italo said he will add the issue by this week.

### issues on agenda
 
#### issue#69 : Draft text clean-up for "channel" vs. "media-channel"
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/69

AP Dieter/Sergio: to introduce a text to highlight that media channel is not related to end to end path while the OTSi/OTSiG represents E2E.

#### issue#92 :oms-element-uid should be mandatory
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/92
 
The issue has been closed with comment (seehttps://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/92#issuecomment-1031492947)

#### issue#101 :Replace OMS/OTS link with OMS/OTS Media Channel Group (see: ITU-T Recommendations G.872 and G.807
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/101

Reated to this issue, Dieter shown the text he prepared to be added in the draft.
There were some comments in the github.
In particular the figure 2 of the draft was analyzed.
Gert asked where the LTP should be put, between ROADM and PA or where.
Aihua:suggested that OMS-MCG should be represented as TE-link 
There was a general agreement to refine a bit the picture to be more aligned with the new terminology introduced (WDT-TE-node etc.) and 
the proposed text about OMS/OTS-MCG

Post-meeting notes: short meeting among Dieter, Sergio and Italo to check figure 2 and agree on the modifications based on comments received during the call
AP: Dieter to refine the text and figure 2 of the draft based on received comments.

#### issue#102 : copropagating raman
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/102

There is agreement to introduce also co-propagating option. The model as it is can support the feature using type-variety.
Only one point has to be verified: if in the case of co-propagation is is enough to report the gain.The power pump can be part of specification in the type-variety.
It is needed to check this point, verifying that with TIP people.
AP: @Esther to check that.

The text in the draft has to be updated without the limitation of counter-propagating RAMAN.

#### issue#95 : Boundary between Layer 0 and Layer 1
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/95

The issue is on github for a while. 
There is material already uploaded. 
It seems that the picture 1 of the package well represent the different part of the process depending of layer.
But still questions need to be investigated :
Is inverse-multiplexing the input signal of OTSiG ?
The basic problem to be solved is which are the parameters our model need to provide to support e.g.the setup of an ODU link?

The time was over when discussion is still on going.


## next meeting: February 15th 2022
