# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (January 30th,2024)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic 
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel --> partially 
- [] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri --> partially
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [x] Roberto Manzotti
- [] Daniel King
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [] Reza Rokui 

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, 
making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.

#### #130 "Documenting mandatory profile for OI applications"

**AP: Esther** will provide a description of the various attributes that even if optional in the model, are needed for OI application. 
These attributes will be described in specifc context.

Let's try to have this list in a couple of weeks from now.

**CLOSED**
There is a first draft proposal from Esther
see issue #130 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/130 

Please review and comment.

### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis

#### Issue #21 "Review otu-type identities"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/21

**AP: @Aihua: to verify with Haomian if these otu identities are needed and where they are defined (some, but not all, are defined in G.Sup43)**

### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology

Closed issues from last IETF117 has been reported in the presentation during IETF118 

issue #134 "Try to shorten the names of attributes"
issue #155 "Absolute path in grouping power-param", 
issue #158 "delta-power contains a ratio in dB. one may call it gain, however gain is only positive, where delta_p could be negative. 
so the type should be changed",
issue #159 "remove from the model grouping sliceable-transponder-attributes"

There is a proposal to solve these issue in PR#160 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/160

**PR#160 merged to the master branch**

### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis 

**PR#82 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/82 merged to the master branch**


### Next calls
  

 
### Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### #153  "Adding guideline for DGE representation"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/153

The YANG update related to this issue have been inserted in the PR#160

The issue is still open since a textual update is also needed.
This is the text agreed to be inserted in the new version of I-D:

> In order to support the modelling of multi bandwidth (parallel)
> and multi stage (cascaded) amplifier like in picture xx, 
> the OMS-element that describe an optical amplifier contains an unordered 
> list of amplifier-element. The position of the elements is based 
> on the following two attributes:
> - the lower-frequecy and upper-frequecy attribute identiting the
> set of amplifier-element that support a specific spectrum bandwidth
> - the stage-order attribute allowing to define for each spectrum bandwidth
> the cascade order of amplifier-element.
> 
> adding ascii picture related to MultiStageAmplifierExample.pptx 
in the github https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/files/13860899/MultiStageAmplifierExample-sb.pptx
> 
> “The detailed representation of the amplifier stages is not always mandatory, 
abstraction is allowed as long as the optical impairments of the multi-stage amplifier are properly modelled.
> For example, the detailed representation of the cascade order details can be required in the case the OMS-Element has both the function
of Amplifier and DGE (see section 2.5).”


#### #145 "Update Security Considerations"

About security is still open the discussion about the rw vs. ro data nodes.
To summarize the issue , in the text proposed for security it is stated that the data nodes in the YANG module are not writable , are readable only.
Gert observed that a couple of data nodes "protection-type" and "inter-layer-sequance-number" are rw. 
Gert suggested we should consider our OI topology model as "information-source-entry" in RFC8795 representing readable topology information
while RFC8795 is also able to modify data nodes adding links/nodes , obtaining a combination of the real topology and what if something is added
in the model. 
As stated in the previous meeting we have kept some data nodes as rw for consistency with RFC8795.
The topology models have been defined as rw to support other UCs 
where the topology information can be written by the client applications and we have defined the LTP protection-type as rw to be consistent
with the link-protection-type attribute defined in RFC8795 that we are using to report OMS protection configuration
Both Esther and Italo commented that there are use cases that could justify to have e.g. protection-type rw.
If it is possible to modify protection-type for OMS protection it should also be possible to modify protection-type
for OTSi protection using the augmented data node in our OI topology model. This would be a use case justifying the possibility 
to use writable data nodes also in our topology model, independently of RFC8795.

### Discussion

We discussed the last update of the YANG model with the two PR being merged.
Sergio mentioned the new PR#89 of RFC9093-bis.
One of the issue addressed in this PR was issue #85 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/85
to change line-coding-bitrate within the grouping common-transceiver-configured-param into config true. 
This request is coming form wdm-tunnle discussion where it was stated the need to have the possibility to configure line-coding-bitrate.
This is not possible into Optical Impairment model where the leaf is defined as read-only.

Linked to this issue it has been discussed a comment sent by Esther related to this issue.
The comment is at https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/85#issuecomment-1916605877.

Esther said that she would like to use OI model not only as read-only model representing data extracted from the field but also using the model
to feed a tool that could be a path computation , a validation tool.
In this case the topology data can be not only "extracted" data but also synthetic data that means data simulated for a what-if scenario
(e.g. I can add a link in the topology or change the bandwidth in a link).
The request would be to have a single model (RW model) that can be utilized in different use cases, both as e.g. exctraced data but also
as input for some tools.

For the moment the decision from the group was to stay with the present read-only model, the changing from read-only to read-write is a BC change
so that it can be made with a OI model-bis. 
It was also agree anyway to add a text in the introduction of the OI draft, explaining that the model is a read-only model ,
but nothing preclude in the future to change data model into RW to address other use cases in addition of exctracting data from the network
to give a controller OI topology information for path computation.

We stated also to discuss of new issue raised by Esther , issue#164. 
In particular Esther pointed out the need to make the OI model less verbose in case of big network. 
Next week we will go through more in details on this topic. 

### Post Meeting notes:

As a post-meeting note, Italo made some considerations about BC considerations in the hypothesisto move from RO to RW some data nodes.. 
 
This is the text in RFC7950:
 
   o  A node that represented state data may be changed to represent
      configuration, provided it is not manadatory (Section 3).
 
Another subtle topic is related with the keys for the lists. Having a key for RO lists is not required but having a key for RW lists
is mandatory and adding a key to an existing list does not look like a BC change according to RFC7950
