# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (December 14,2021)


****Attendees****
- [] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [X]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [X]Jan Kundrat



## Discussion

### Review APs (action point) 

 
#### AP oms-element-uid: Esther to propose some text related to use case.
##### status: done

##### issue #92 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/92

Text proposed:
"Although optional, some use cases might require that oms-element-uid be present in the topology. 
For example oms-element-uid might be needed to clearly identify a "site" to enable path computation to handle routing constraint associated to this site. 
The index in the OMS element list might not be sufficient in this case."
and if some example is needed:
"
For example, let's assume 2 parallel links between ROADM A and ROADM B, each with a list of elements 0-5, with oms-element-uid a-f and oms-element-uid aa-ee respectively. Suppose that the constraint is exclude "site d" from the route ("site d" being in reality the fourth element of the OMS of link 0). Without oms-element-uid there is no possibility to convey the required information to identify which link is concerned by this constraint: "site x" is also the fourth element of a link between ROADM A and ROADM B. So that it is not possible to apply the constraint.
------>
"site d"
Link-id-0: ROADM A - 0(a) -1(b) - 2(c) - 3(d) - 4(e) -5(f) -ROADM B
------>
"site x"
Link-id-1: ROADM A - 0(aa) -1(bb) - 2(cc) - 3(dd) - 4(ee) -ROADM B
"
People agree on the text proposed by Esther.

#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: open
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

#### AP RAMAN amplification: Esther-Dieter: put some text to better clarify that fiber loss has to be considered separated to raman gain and
to clarify how raman amplification is supported by our model
##### status: done
##### issue #91 RAMAN amplification in the model https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/91

There was agreement to introduce the text proposed by Dieter/Esther, with the modification suggested by Italo/Enrico/Sergio in the last part of the text.
Here the definite text proposed https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/91#issuecomment-993636135

About Gabriele's comment https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/91#issuecomment-993487933

Enrico raised some doubts related to the support of co-propagating raman pump with the actual set of attributes contained in the model.
He said that the co-propagating pump raman it can saturate more easily without an adeguate pump control that can reduce pump level as the number of channels are reducing.
Esther would prefer to stay with the present model explicitly saying to support counter-propagating pump.
If the current model does not support co-propagating raman pump, Italo agrees that it is better to state this explicitly in the draft. If needed, 
the attributes required to model the co-propagating raman pump can be added either by proprietary augmentations or in a future revision of the YANG model.

It was decided that is acceptable, for the moment, to limit the solution to counter-propagating pumps only.
An explicit sentence regarding this point will be added ,together with the text suggested by Dieter.

### discussed issue
#### issue#86 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/86

The request in the issue is to use our model also to describe a topology where the ROADMs have one/multiple external shelves with OTs, 
and to represent the single link in between as OMS-link even if the external shelf does not contain any mux, so that the link between the remote transceiver and
the ROADM is not an OMS.

The scenario is not properly what we consider as "alien wavelength" in which transceiver is hosted in the client node and different controllers manage the scenario.
In this case the external shelf is managed by the same controller as the ROADM.
Gabriele said that the different with respect the integrated transponder scenario is if the optical impairments on the link connecting the shelf and
ROADM ports, are negligible or not.
As suggested by Igor, we agree that the model is already able to support the scenario: the shelf containing the transponders can be represented by a TE-Node with only
termination capability and not switching.
So the request from Esther is accepted, the text proposed will be added in the draft.
Here the text:
The impairments related to the link between remote optical transponders located in a different shelf from the ROADM itself,
can also be modelled using the same optical impairments as those defined for a link between ROADMs (OMS).

Post meeting note: see comment https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/86#issuecomment-993697303



## next meeting: December 21st or January 11th 2022
confirmation pending, based on the number of people still around with Christmas vacation approaching. A further notice will be sent.

