# **YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (February 23,2021)**

****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [x] Haomian Zheng

## Finalize to upload both draft-esdih-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-00 and https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang-06

We will request a single slot in CCAMP for both the drafts.
In the presentation it is needed to underline that layer0-type-ext has impact and relatioship with optical-impairment-topology, dwdm-inteface, but also with flexgrid and wson tunnel YANG models.

## AP@Gabriele/Enrico to finalize the work with a definite proposal for the FEC types.

A YANG proposal based on the list created by Enrico and Gabriele, have been presented.
The list is considered acceptable provided that every FEC type has its own standard reference.

To be done:
* c-fec : need to have a correct OIF ZR reference
* o-fec: need to check ITU-T referecne document
* rs-528-514-fec : ITU-T standard reference missing and specific section
* rs-255-239-fec : ITU-T G.709 correct section to be added
* add text in the draft to have a brief description of FEC types.

AP @Enrico/Gabriele to complete the action before to consider closed the issue https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/issues/16

## Discussion on minimum-channel-spacing issue #42
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42

About this issue, it was agreed:

We do not refer anymore to minimum-channe-spacing but but to the bandwidth (portion of spectrum) required by one carrier that is represented by 
 "OTSi-carrier-bandwidth" in our YANG model.

The intention of Gabriele is to have in the model a specific attribute to represent the bandwidth (portion of spectrum) required by one carrier or to have the attibutes needed to "compute" the protion of spectrum needed, in case vendor specification is not able to provide direct attibute.
In our model we have already the needed spectrum per carrie named "OTSi-carrier-bandwidth". 

Since some the other proposed attributes (available-baudrate,nyquist-spacing, roll-off, xtalk-penalty) from which the carrier-bandwidth can be calculated, could be needed for other purposes, it was decided that these attributes will be present in the model anyway and not in alternative (choice) to "OTSi-carrier-bandwidt" as originally proposed in the issue
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42

To be done: 

AP @Italo/Sergio: to modify YANG accodingly
AP @Gabriele : to provode some text for the draft 

## Added Esther's comment https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/51#issuecomment-784254945

Esther has introduced an issue related to the mapping between abstract view in our model of ROADM and the possibility that multiple intput/output ports of the pre-ampl and booster.

It was decided to have an ad-hoc meeting on the subject, next Monday March 1st, 3-4 pm CET.
