# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (February 6th,2024)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic 
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel --> partially 
- [] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri --> partially
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [x] Roberto Manzotti
- [] Daniel King
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [] Reza Rokui 

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis

#### Issue #21 "Review otu-type identities"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/21

**AP: @Aihua: to verify with Haomian if these otu identities are needed and where they are defined (some, but not all, are defined in G.Sup43)**

### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology



### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis 

**PR#82 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/82 merged to the master branch**


### Next calls

February 13th, 2pm CET

 
### Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### #153  "Adding guideline for DGE representation"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/153

YANG update has been already addressed in the context of PR#160
On the base text proposed by Roberto and Italo, an editorial refined version  has been proposed by Dieter for agreement 


#### #145 "Update Security Considerations"

About security is still open the discussion about the rw vs. ro data nodes.
To summarize the issue , in the text proposed for security it is stated that the data nodes in the YANG module are not writable , are readable only.
Gert observed that a couple of data nodes "protection-type" and "inter-layer-sequance-number" are rw. Gert suggested we should consider our OI topology model as "information-source-entry" in RFC8795 representing readable topology information while RFC8795 is also able to modify data nodes adding links/nodes , obtaining a combination of the real topology and what if something is added in the model. 
As stated in the previous meeting we have kept some data nodes as rw for consistency with RFC8795.
The topology models have been defined as rw to support other UCs where the topology information can be written by the client applications and we have defined the LTP protection-type as rw to be consistent with the link-protection-type attribute defined in RFC8795 that we are using to report OMS protection configuration
Both Esther and Italo commented that there are use cases that could justify to have e.g. protection-type rw.
If it is possible to modify protection-type for OMS protection it should also be possible to modify protection-type for OTSi protection using the augmented data node in our OI topology model. This would be a use case justifying the possibility to use writable data nodes also in our topology model, independently of RFC8795.



### Discussion

#### issue#130 Documenting mandatory profile for OI applications 

Esther has provided a text proposal to describe the needed parameters in case of OI
application.https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/130#issuecomment-1916626644

Gert provided a comment underlining that in case of parallel multi-band amplifiers an additional splitter/combiner
element needs to be modeled.
Enrico replied that there are 2 possible options:
1. Model them explicitly as a part of the OMS-element
2. Model them implicitly by considering their effect on the NF and gain of the amplifiers (one for each band)

and Enrico is more in favour of the option 2.

Italo also added that the discussion on the topic was already done and that option 2 was the 
choice.
But this option has to be properly documented in the I-D text and/or YANG descriptions.
##### AP @Dieter/Sergio : to ad in the I-D part of amplifier a piece of text to describe the option 2 as above

Always related to issue#130 there was some discusson related on where to put this description,and
how to reference the slides form C. kelly that was the base for ROADM model.
The general agreement was to put the material in the github referencing the Colin's slide.
Maybe a future step could be to create a new draft, applicability ducument, based on this profile material.

#### issue#164 Found some inconsistency while profiling

Total-loss for fibers: stress the fact that total-loss is obtained by measurement between power in and power out.
##### AP @Esther:to make a proposal for "total-loss" description

Moreover there is the request to create like a  template to put in common device description 
within a network instance  (i.e. to collect under the template attributes values shared among same type of devices,
e.g. ROADM or transceiver). 





