# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (August 10,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [X] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [X] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [X] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)


### Github issues review

#### issue #83
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/83

It has been reported the outcomes of the call held on August 5th.MoM at https://demo.hedgedoc.org/oXyjMKIUQrCa9-HsrKYFdw
Igor further underlined that the important point is that between the transponders belonging to one group there is an electrical connectivity in place that can be pre-provisioned or dinamically provisioned.
The fact that they are part of the same card (not mandatory) or connected by cable are possible examples (which would be described in the draft just as possible examples).
It was specified that an "extra-cost" metric would be associated to the defined group of transponders, this metric would influence path computation choice among diferent groups (even if belonging to different nodes).
We can immagine to have a 3R-group entity with identifier of the group, extra-cost metric and pointers to transponder belonging to the group. 
The group is characterized by hw device characteristic, not to be exposed at NBI,but deduced by the controller e.g. at SBI.

#### issue #76
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/76

To solve the issue it was agreed that we need to add the transceiver a pointer to both the outgoing OTSi and incoming OTSi.
At the moment the model is only providing a pointer from OTSi to the related transceiver.

#### issue #77 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/77

Italo commented the text proposed by Julien, suggesting do not use the term TP in the text and a new sentence has been proposed in github for both LTP and TTP. See https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/77#issuecomment-896001705

The basic agreement is that we need to clearly state in the document that both LTP and TTP are bidirectional.
AP @dieterbeller to check in the text and update the draft according to the statement above.

The issue is practically solved but need to wait new PR when text will be added.
##### status: solved but waiting for new PR

#### issue #75
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/75

Agreement:
* OTSi group should be moved under the network, and only referenced in ttp
* suggested to use a string as type for OTSi group identifier (more flexible)

Julien raised question about the relatioship between this OTSi group id and tunnel identifiers as long as OTSiG is seen realted to the service.

Based on this question a discussion was opened with two basic separated question:
1. if it is really need to have OTSiG information in a topology model (Julien)
2. if it is needed to have also OTSi information in a topology model (Italo/Aihua/Igor)

One comment pointed the need to have OTSi to have information related to carrier: the doubt is whether this information is needed in the tunnel model, in the topology model or in both models

Moreover,before removing OTSiG from the topology information, Esther pointed the need to define end-to-end spectral resource reservation eg for super-channels, marking spectrum as ‘continuously reserved’, even if all OTSi of an OTSiG are not yet in place. OTSiG might not be the correct tool for that. 

There was no conclusion on the discussion.
The group proposed to discuss this offline.
### next meeting scheduling
Taking into account vacation period,next meeting will be **September 7th** 

### Post-meeting note:Italo/Sergio made a new PR,PR#90  https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/90
finalizing 3R model as depicted above.
