# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (September 20th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [x] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) 



#### issue#24 : Model alignment with 400G-ZR
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24
moved to https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/issues/51
in layer0-types-ext (draft-ietf-ccamp-rfc9093-bis-01)

-YANG modification : add Inband (IB) OSNR , Out-of-band (OOB) OSNR , Transmitter polarization dependent power difference X-Y skew
**AP @italobusi @sergiobelotti** : to add the parameters in YANG layer0-types-ext , grouping common-explicit

-Tx output power with transmit disabled: need to clarify the meaning since no definition exists both in the OIF IA and in Open ZR+ MSA documents. 
**AP : @ggalimba56 : to check internally**

-Looking at ITU-T G.698.2 there are cases in which at one application code corresponds 2 line-coding. This would be a problem for IW e.g. in case operational mode is used for transponder (same application code but possible different line coding, no interworking).
We decided to leave ITU-T to deal with that and put some text raising the point. 
**AP @dieterbeller **to modify the draft adding the text.

For the parameter for which there is no standard reference , as soon as text definiton is ready it will be provided in github (see AP @ggalimba56 : to check internally)


### Closed Issues
There are a list of closed issues for YANG update https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/111#issue-1288495684, and issues #25, #88 for text update all closed for IETF-114 in July 2022. 


### Next calls
September 27th 

## Discussion
Very few attendance due to the overlapping with other events (ITU-T meeting and ECOC).
Sergio reported the results of the restricted meeting with YANG teas-topo experts, on the extension needed for OPS reporting capability.
See slide in the package .
2 problems:
How to split traffic using LLCL that has a TP as key in the list
AD1 and AD2  implications: We do not want to break the abstraction in the node but we need to model the possibility that from the transceiver , after the splitter, the path toward LTP belonging to the protection, can be different depending on the add-drop ports chosen
One promising solution for 1. is to add in the LLC list that has TP as key, an additional list of TP for which the traffic can be splitted. This list will be present only in case of protection.
Maybe a YANG feature “OPS” can be used to make explicit the supporting of the capability
Alignment with the solution in case OT is outside of WDM-TE-node and we use connectivity matrix, that already permits to have multiple entries related to the same line port (LTP). 
augment     /nw:networks/nw:network/nw:node/tet:te
                            /tet:tunnel-termination-poin
                           /tet:local-link-connectivities
                          /tet:local-link-connectivity:
+--ro additional-ltp*     -> ../../../../../ nt:termination-point/nt:tp-id {OPS}?
+--ro add-path-impairments?    leafref
+--ro drop-path-impairments?   leafref


### issues on agenda


#### issue #107 "Optical protection switching requires additional parameters "
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/107

Background:

-With the last update for IETF-114 we have modeled how to represent the existing OTSi already there in the network in case of protection
--> we consider impairments impact of the different paths associated with existing OTSi on the optical feasibility for a new OTSi

-Capability reporting still to be introduced in the model

-There was one comment on the proposal from Gabriele, who said the the proposal could be good but an "entity" 
providing the E2E view of the OTSi is missing in the model.
Italo said that this "entity" is the tunnel (or LSP as instantiation of tunnel) 
but he has doubt on the need to add this information to a topology model when this concept should be part of an extension 
of the te-tunnel model, for which we already have L0 extension (WSON and flexible grid) but not optical impairments.
Sergio/Dieter raised the comment about the introduction of dependency on tunnel model in the case we would decide 
to exploit that as referecne for the E2E OTSi entity.

##### Discussion
## Discussion
Very few attendance due to the overlapping with other events (ITU-T meeting and ECOC).
Sergio reported the results of the restricted meeting with YANG teas-topo experts, on the extension needed for OPS reporting capability.
See slide in the package .
2 problems:
How to split traffic using LLCL that has a TP as key in the list
AD1 and AD2  implications: We do not want to break the abstraction in the node but we need to model the possibility that from the transceiver ,
after the splitter, the path toward LTP belonging to the protection, can be different depending on the add-drop ports chosen
One promising solution for 1. is to add in the LLC list that has TP as key, an additional list of TP for which the traffic can be splitted.
This list will be present only in case of protection.
Maybe a YANG feature “OPS” can be used to make explicit the supporting of the capability
Alignment with the solution in case OT is outside of WDM-TE-node and we use connectivity matrix, that already permits to have multiple entries
related to the same line port (LTP). 
augment     /nw:networks/nw:network/nw:node/tet:te
                            /tet:tunnel-termination-poin
                           /tet:local-link-connectivities
                          /tet:local-link-connectivity:
+--ro additional-ltp*     -> ../../../../../ nt:termination-point/nt:tp-id {OPS}?
+--ro add-path-impairments?    leafref
+--ro drop-path-impairments?   leafref

#### Issue with new IETF tool
IETF has introduce a new version of the tool to compile a draft.
Gabriele have been trying to compile more than one draft with YANG model inside and he got errors even with file already uploaded 
e.g. draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang-10.
It seems hat the problem was coming exactly by the YANG module, when YANG is not present the compilation has positive result.

Post meeting note: Gabriele tried to recompile the drafts with xml2rnc tool and now it seems the tool worked properly
(also compiling files with Yang models).

