# **YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (February 09,2021)**

****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [ ] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [ ] Victor Lopez
- [x] Haomian Zheng



## Clean-up layer0-type-ext 

### layer0-types-ext [PR#17](https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/pull/17)

Related to this there a re 3 issues:

#### [Issue #14](https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/issues/14) about identity term-type 

Currently used by wson-tunnel and flexi-grid-media-channel models.

Approved to keep them in the layer0-type-ext for the moment and to evaluate possible usage depending on the model used to setup connectivity sevices over DWDM network

#### [Issue #15](https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/issues/15) about identity layer0-bandwidth-type

Approved to change the name to otu-type

AP @Sergio/Italo to change YANG definition

#### [Issue #16](https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/issues/16) about indentity fec-type

There are different types of FEC definiton both in layer0-types-ext and the ones previously defined in layer0-types and removed form there during WG LC. 

The fec-type is currently used by wson-tunnel and flexi-grid-media-channel models while the FEC is currently used by the optical impairments model.

We need to reconcile both list of FEC definitons.

Gabriele commented that the FEC types defined at the moment in layer0-types-ext are old, probably used in the context of 10Gb rate but no more in coherent technology (e.g. Golay and Hamming Code)

AP@Gabriele/Enrico  to create a list with needed FEC type, with some references for their definition, before to update the YANG and then close the issue.

## Clean-up optical-impairment-topology 

### [PR#53](https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/53) on alignment with the latest version of layer0-types-ext

The PR is approved but merging is pending again for travis check issue 

AP@Esther: to fix travis checks failed

## General

AP@Dieter/Sergio to update text in the draft for layer0-type-ext and Italo to review it.

Suggested to use as first update text taken by layer0-type, and then to update that.

AP@Italo/Sergio to fix YANG for layer0-type-ext with the updates required from PR#17 (see above)

### Comment on [issue #42](https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42) related to minimum-channel-spacing parameter

Gabriele commented https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42#issuecomment-775816473  over Sergio's comment https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42#issuecomment-769833390

Agreed with Sergio's view on the need do not use "channel spacing" term to indicate the bandwidth (or portion of the spectrum) required by a specific carrier to be routed in a DWDM or SSON network. This is exactly what Gabriele wanted to address with his new minimum channel spacing definiton.

On the other hand it is needed to clarify better among the different attributes already present in the model.

Dieter reminded that one of the attribute required for transceiver was "transmitter tunability", while what Gabriele is addressing here is the "required carrier bandwidth".

More discussion and clarification is needed on this topic.

See Sergio's further post-meeting  comment https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42#issuecomment-776115710


## Next Meeting 
Tuesday , February 16th, 2pm CET
