# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (September 6th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- []
- [] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) 



#### issue#24 : Model alignment with 400G-ZR
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24
moved to https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext/issues/51
in layer0-types-ext (draft-ietf-ccamp-rfc9093-bis-01)

-YANG modification : add Inband (IB) OSNR , Out-of-band (OOB) OSNR , Transmitter polarization dependent power difference X-Y skew
**AP @italobusi @sergiobelotti** : to add the parameters in YANG layer0-types-ext , grouping common-explicit

-Tx output power with transmit disabled: need to clarify the meaning since no definition exists both in the OIF IA and in Open ZR+ MSA documents. 
**AP : @ggalimba56 : to check internally**

-Looking at ITU-T G.698.2 there are cases in which at one application code corresponds 2 line-coding. This would be a problem for IW 
e.g. in case operational mode is used for transponder (same application code but possible different line coding, no interworking).
We decided to leave ITU-T to deal with that and put some text raising the point. 
**AP @dieterbeller **to modify the draft adding the text.

For the parameter for which there is no standard reference , as soon as text definiton is ready it will be provided in github
(see AP @ggalimba56 : to check internally)


### Closed Issues
There are a list of closed issues for YANG update
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/111#issue-1288495684, 
and issues #25, #88 for text update all closed for IETF-114 in July 2022. 


### Next calls
September 13th 

## Discussion

### issues on agenda


#### issue #107 "Optical protection switching requires additional parameters "
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/107

Background:

-With the last update for IETF-114 we have modeled how to represent the existing OTSi already there in the network in case of protection --> we consider 
impairments impact of the different paths associated with existing OTSi on the optical feasibility for a new OTSi

-Capability reporting still to be introduced in the model

-There was one comment on the proposal from Gabriele, who said the the proposal could be good but an "entity" 
providing the E2E view of the OTSi is missing in the model.
Italo said that this "entity" is the tunnel (or LSP as instantiation of tunnel) 
but he has doubt on the need to add this information to a topology model when this concept should be part of an extension 
of the te-tunnel model, for which we already have L0 extension (WSON and flexible grid) but not optical impairments.
Sergio/Dieter raised the comment about the introduction of dependency on tunnel model in the case we would decide 
to exploit that as referecne for the E2E OTSi entity.

##### Discussion
Gabriele: I think that the description above represents correctly the sceanrio, what we can say is that we need to chose between a solution more aligned
with what done for other use cases exploiting tunnel model or to find a "on purpose" solution just for topology model.
Igor: I have difficult to think about a topology model without an associated tunnel model. E2E protection is already in the tunnel model.
Dieter: in WDM there are specific entities (e.g. splitter/selector) supporting protection and the information regarding these entities have to be 
considered in the topology model. OTSi protection capability can be considered as a path computation constraint for services requiring a very high availability.
Sergio: let me show the slides for capability reporting that are pertinent to that.
Igor: I agree , both topology and tunnel augmentation should be considered.
Gabriele: regarding the entities mentioned by Dieter examples are : the possibility to bridge the traffic, the possibility for traffic selection.
Igor: about the tunnel, it's probably not needed to built again what already contained in the agnostic te-tunnel but starting to flexgrid tunnel, 
adding the optical impairments related needed information.
Igor: we have talked about 1+1 protection but what about 1:1?
Dieter: 1:1 would mean to have extra-traffic, not so common in L0. No preclusion about 1:1 but I do not see particular reason to work on it.
It appears similar to restoration with the same time constraints. 
Gabriele: not sure about the advantages to put effort on work on it.
Julien: with 1:1, if you do not use extra-traffic, that means that a given set of resource will be preempted in case of event on the nominal path,
which is a mess to manage and very few people are ready to put traffic there. Moreover 1:1 in WDM, is also different from 1+1 for optical power reasons,
since a split may impact the performance. Moreover as said by Dieter, 1:1 is similar to a pre-planned restoration without bringing any time benefit with
resepct a proter restoration.
But nothing preclude to work on that in case a network does not support split/selection or does not support control plane (for restoration) , 
but just as corner case.
Dieter: need to study everybody where in the topology model already exist information to be used for protection.
Igor: Italo/Aihua can help for that 
Sergio: slides 12-13-14 alredy contain some pointers. 

In summary:
1) from topology model, we agree that is needed to provide information whether a tranceiver is connected to a port of an entity
(HW entity e.g. splitter/selector) able to provide OTSi protection or to a port of an ADD/DROP providing OTSi capability.
Slides 12-13-14 of the package already provides hook of how to model the OTSi protection capability reporting
2) an extension of te-tunnel model is needed to cover the complete E2E protection,probably starting from an extension of flexgrid tunnel 
with optical impairments characteristics.

#### Issue with new IETF tool
IETF has introduce a new version of the tool to compile a draft.
Gabriele have been trying to compile more than one draft with YANG model inside and he got errors even with file already 
uploaded e.g. draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang-10.
It seems hat the problem was coming exactly by the YANG module, when YANG is not present the compilation has positive result.
