# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (May 10th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [] Julien Meuric
- [] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x]Enrico Griseri
- [X] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) 

#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: ON GOING
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

#### AP @Gabriele/Sergio to check internally with optical expert the real impact for topology model of the (additional) parameters included in the OpenZR+ specs.
Transmitter

* Tx output power with transmit disabled ?
* Inband (IB) OSNR ?
* Out-of-band (OOB) OSNR ?
* Transmitter polarization dependent power difference ?
* X-Y skew ?
* 
Receiver Opt. specs.

* PMD (avg) tolerance
* Peak PDL tolerance

##### related issue#24 : Model alignment with 400G-ZR
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24

### Closed Issues


### Next calls
- next call on May 17th 


## Discussion

### issues on agenda


#### issue #107 "Optical protection switching requires additional parameters "
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/107

A new option for modeling of optical protection swithing has been provided and OPS capability added as well in the slide deck.
Sergio presented the update:
At slide 11 on OPS capability stopped presentation due to some comments and discussion

Sergio asked Igor why the protection-type attribute in TEAS-topo (RFC8795) is a single leaf and not a list to permit a number of protection types.
Igor replied that in topology model what is protected is the LSP not the "components" of LSP.
Igor made the reference to out photonic case in which the protection should be the OTSiG not the single component, OTSi.
Gert: where the protection is started, and where the OPS capability (e.g. protection-type)is attached to?
 Gert had some concerns about terminology: OTSi can be single carrier or multiple-carriers/sub-carriers.Has that an impact on the protection? 
 Is a protection of OTSi or OTSiG, so the group of OTSi related to 1 client.
 Gert: we protect tunnel. Is it OTSiG protection?
 Dieter: protection at server layer. We have to look at the service WDM is carrying. 
 Gabriele: selector is working on OTSi. As soon as an OTSi is is in fault the entire OTSiG has to be declared fault.
 Igor: What we protect is an LSP and an OTSiG is like  an LSP. So we do not protect just al L0 but we need to look at the service provided by the WDM layer. 
 Gert: physical selectors act upon loss-of-light and are useful for single OTSi. What we discuss here is a selector for the LSP=OTSiG. 
 This is a logical "selector" that is working on top of real physical selector encompassing ideally the different selectors at single OTSi.
 We should define terminology to distinguish between them(e.g. selector vs. logical-selector or OTSi-selector vs. OTSiG-selector)
 Esther; this is not part of topology model but is related to the service offered .
 Dieter: We are talking about OTSi or OTSis (group of OTSi) protection,this is the use case not OTSiG coordination among different OTSi.
 The reality is that we have a photonic protection, not another layer. 
 Igor: need to consider the switch of all of OTSis belonging to OTSiG
 Esther: this is part of the service not topology, the topology has to provide the impairments related to the case of photonic protection. 
We are not discussiing inverse multiplexing.
Esther: The switch of all OTSi together is not in our context.
Igor suggested to add in the capability also the augmentation of LLCL in case of integrated model case.(ref slide 11) 
for alignment with slide 12 in which we propose connectivity matrix entry augmentation.

Sergio completed the presentation, time is over and all the attendees have been invited to look at the slides,
start analysis of the proposal, and provide comments on github to enhance the discussion off-line before next meeting.
 
  
#### issue#24 : Model alignment with 400G-ZR
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24

* There was a common agreement that the model is already suitable for any pluggable , no needs to have a specific model to cover 400G ZR+
* ZR+ is specified in OpenROADM , and as such it can be managed as an “MSA” fora organizational mode, see section 2.5.2 that already mention for a as part of organizational mode case.
* We need to be sure that this MSA organizational mode can be a superset of the list of explicit attributes. Need to be check the list of needed parameters for ZR+ (Gabriele)
* There could be an OTN compatibility issue for ZR+ that has to be verified. This could be an issue in case of 3R. Not only for ZR+ we could consider the opportunity to add an attribute to provide information regarding digital compatibility.

In general:
* The model with operational modes seems providing already way to manage compatibility issues
* We should probably digging more in scenario with 3R, but also in this case seems that operational mode could be enough.
* Client information are input of path computation, and are not part of the topology model. We can suppose that other model already provided this information.
* In case of zr+ we can add sentence to specify to be careful about operational modes e.g. you could have zr+-ethernet and zr+-otn
* The way happens ODUflex ODUCn mapping is an input to path computation. Maybe operational mode could be not sufficient. 
AP @Italo to check with ITU guys.

Gabriele was out of the meeting and we decided to wait for him to analyse more carefully his comment on https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/24#issuecomment-1054238457 before closing eventually the issue

We went through the comment from Gabriele to understand if we can or not consider the issue closed.
Gabriele explains a bit the difference between the models 400ZR, OpenZR+. Both do not support OTN, as instead is supported by OpenROADM with client traffic (100-400 GbE & OTN).

We should add an attribute representing the fact that the same application code support more than 1 line-coding. This an an impact in case operational mode is used for transponder (same application code but possible different line coding, no interworking).
Need to define new identities in YANG to represent the different line-coding applicable to the same application code.

AP @Italo/Gabriele/Sergio need to understand how to structure the attribute 



 



