# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (September 21,2021)


****Attendees****
- [] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [X]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [X] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)

### discussion

There was an initial discussion introduced by Igor, on the opportunity to think if it would be needed 
to prioritize contributions of the different paramenters to the path computation based on our topology model.
Gabriele said that we could investigate on this point.
Enrico replied that the relevance of the impairment depends on the transponder characteristics and 
from the engineering rules the vendor may base the design on; thus it is difficult to quantify the level of contribution and then prioritize them. 
Moreover, the relative weight of the impairment depends on the actual configuration of the network. For example, 
non linear impairments depend on the number of channels and from their spectral placement with respect to the OTSi under scrutiny.

* issue #89
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/89

It was discussed the comment from Italo https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/89#issuecomment-923907647

Italo,proposing slight modification on the proposed text, and having doubt on the last two sencences regarding Optical Channel Monitoring: 
"Moreover the knowledge of the OTSi position in the spectrum is also useful in the intermediate nodes to easy the Optical Channel Monitoring in the ROADM"
While this text is considered very important in the context of the information to be provided by the controller (or by the control plane) to a ROADM during path setup,
Italo has doubts that this information can have impact to the information to be provided in the topology model for path computation. 

There was agreement to delete this sentence from the text and instead opening an issue to discuss this sentence 
in the context of tunnel setup: https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-flexigrid-media-channel-yang

**AP@Italo to open the new issue in the above github for media channel**

Italo also proposing this text to keep track of the scalability issue regarding OTSi information raised by Igor:
"The OTSi information provided in this model scales with the number of OTSi. An alternative approach could be to aggregate the OTSi information into few attributes
which can be used by path computation to understand the impact of the existing OTSis on the optical impairments of the new OTSi as well as the impact of the new OTSi 
on the optical impairments of the existing OTSis. However, no standard attributes, independent from the equipment vendor and path computation algorithm,
have been identified or defined in other standard documents"

The text was well perceived by attendees summarizing in a pertinent way the discussion we had about scalability topic.
However, there was agreement to keep the text in the minute, but do not consider it as text to be added in the draft, 
for the reason well described in the last part of Italo's text: "....However, no standard attributes, 
independent from the equipment vendor and path computation algorithm, have been identified or defined in other standard documents".
So the definite proposed text has been reported in github at
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/89#issuecomment-923955243 

#### Post meeting comment https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/89#issuecomment-924709713:
Gert suggested do not use the term carrier (OTSi) on behalf of channel since "channel is a portion of a spectrum and exists without OTSi".
He proposed a slight modification of the text: "....*To compute performance it is needed to have information regarding the baudrate , 
power and carrier-frequency of the different channels OTSi in the OMS . 
Besides, you also need to know which channels OTSi are added/ dropped in the ROADM, to compute overall channel power in ROADMs, 
in order to check ROADM’s power constraints*"

* issue #42
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42

This issue was linked to a PR of layer0-type-ext model, but then there was decision of deleting 
"OTSi-carrier-bandwidth" and add "minimum-channel-spacing" on behalf.
So a new PR would be needed to close finally this issue.
Moreover a definition of "minimum-channel-spacing"was proposed first by Enrico/Dieter/Sergio 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42#issuecomment-821097420

Now Italo summarized the status in the last comment with some modification of the propsoed minimum-channel-spacing definition.
Here the link of the last Italo's comment 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/42#issuecomment-924163449

**AP@all: please have a look and comment the definition text proposed by Italo**

#### meeting scheduling

Next meeting will be **September 28th**  
