YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly call (November 16,2021)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti
- [] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)

## Discussion

### Yang bug fixing PR#96 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/96

Fixing few bugs in YANG:

* use of deref(): fix deref() YANG syntax usage as XPATH function #84 --> we can consider closed the issue since both reading RFC 7950 and looking at example 
of the usage of deref() in other modules it seems clear that deref() cannot be used in xpath but just in comparison like must or when.

* otsi-ref within an MCG should a leaf-list
* description of incoming-otsi

* the llc-transceiver list moved under TTP LLC entry from default TTP LLC

### issue #92 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/92

Aihua: the relationship between a TE topology entity and the device model can be defined in a separate model.
Dieter: we do not have device model. You may not have device model also in the future. 
Aihua: from this model prospective there is no need to put that as mandatory
Julien: I agree that the attribute shall be mandatory but not necessarily for having a glue with the device model.
Julien: I can leave with keeping it optional

Most people believe it could be left as optional.

Park the issue waiting for Esther before closing it.

### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

Italo: OTSiG is just management construct is providing nothing about optical impairments.

Aihua: OTSiG is the result of the connection setup. 
When you have setup a tunnel you need to configure at the endpoint the same OTSiG, and so you would need the information about OTSiG.
Italo: this is configuration aspect that has nothing to do with path computation.

Italo: Knowing which OTSiGs are in the network does not influence the setup of a new OTSiG (you need to know the OTSis as previosly discussed).
Do you need to know that some OTSi belonging to the same OTSiG?

Gabriele:The OTSiG does not have any optical impairment parameter but it is only an OTSi groomimg. So OTSiG size will be function of number and kind of OTSi it contains.
For optical feasibility calculation is then fundamental to know the OTSi type.

Julien: identification purpose. Global unique identifier for OTSiG as prefix to OTSi identification. 
Dieter: OTSiG identifier can be used as prefix while OTSi id could be an index related to that
Italo: There are two options for global unique identification of an OTSi: 
-have a flat list of OTSis, with a structure OTSi identifier, 
which includes the OTSiG global unique identifier and the OTSi local identifier (within the group), or 
-have the list of OTSiG (with OTSiG global unique identifier, which is also structured) and a list of OTSi with the local identifier (uint16). 

The latter option is the current model. From a functional perspective the two options are equivalent.

Dieter: will try to put some text to clarify the point.
Dieter is volunteer to make a proposal for the text 

### layer0-types-ext 

We discussed the outcomes from CCAMP session of IETF-112 regarding the relatioship of this draft with RFC9093. The alternatives proposed during the meeting were:
* publish the draft as a new RFC making RFC9093 obsolete that means to replace the obsolete RFC and the new draft can be used alone. 
* publish that as an update and in this case should reference to the old one

Italo: the difference is that in case you obsolete the original one it is needed to put the former text inside. Instead for update you need anyway to put all the model (old and the update)but no all the text.

Discussion on how to proceed is just started and is adjurned to the next meeting.

## next meeting: November 23
