# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (February 27th,2024)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic 
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri 
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [x] Roberto Manzotti 
- [] Daniel King
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [] Reza Rokui 
- [x] Scott Mansfield

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis



### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology



### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis 

**PR#96 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/96 merged at the master branch ** 

Closing 6 issues: 
####  Updated XPath in the leafref for supported application codes and supported organizational modes: fix modify leafrefs added to the *container compatible-modes *when *transceiver-mode grouping* is used in *transceiver-capabilities grouping*. #95

#### Resolved yanglint warnings: fix Check yanglint compilation errors #91

#### Updated data types for max-diff-group-delay, min-Q-factor, available-baud-rate data types: fix type issues for dgd, min q factor baudrate and some reference #94

#### Added new identities for wavelength assignment: fix Adopting new identities for wavelength assignment mechanism #92

#### Cleaned up the OTU type definitions: fix Review otu-type identities #21

#### Moved authors to contributors list: fix Authors on the front page #90



### Next calls

March 5th (if needed)

 
### Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### #153  "Adding guideline for DGE representation"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/153

YANG update has been already addressed in the context of PR#160
On the base text proposed by Roberto and Italo, an editorial refined version  has been proposed by Dieter for agreement 


#### #145 "Update Security Considerations"

About security is still open the discussion about the rw vs. ro data nodes.
To summarize the issue , in the text proposed for security it is stated that the data nodes in the YANG module are not writable , are readable only.
Gert observed that a couple of data nodes "protection-type" and "inter-layer-sequance-number" are rw. Gert suggested we should consider our OI topology model as "information-source-entry" in RFC8795 representing readable topology information while RFC8795 is also able to modify data nodes adding links/nodes , obtaining a combination of the real topology and what if something is added in the model. 
As stated in the previous meeting we have kept some data nodes as rw for consistency with RFC8795.
The topology models have been defined as rw to support other UCs where the topology information can be written by the client applications and we have defined the LTP protection-type as rw to be consistent with the link-protection-type attribute defined in RFC8795 that we are using to report OMS protection configuration
Both Esther and Italo commented that there are use cases that could justify to have e.g. protection-type rw.
If it is possible to modify protection-type for OMS protection it should also be possible to modify protection-type for OTSi protection using the augmented data node in our OI topology model. This would be a use case justifying the possibility to use writable data nodes also in our topology model, independently of RFC8795.



### Discussion



Agenda for today : plan for upload 

**RFC9093-bis**

No I-D text update foreseen, YANG update already done.
The draft would be ready for upload, as soon as it is updated the date and included the updated tree and YANG model.

**Optical Impairment draft**

PR#168 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/168

is waiting for approval (already approved by Esther)

The PR is addressing issue#166 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/166 missing namespace in equalization definition

#### to be done in I-D:

issue#169 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/169
I-D text update describing how to use the total-loss attribute for the fiber OMS element

o	total-loss should be used to report computed loss based on measurement. So that inconsistency between computed loss based on loss_coef and length + connector loss means:

"```Total loss is used to report loss measured with ingress and egress amplifier power measurement facility (power measured at ingress amplifier output to the fiber span - power measured at egress amplifier input from the fiber span in dB). This measurement may deviate from the computed loss based on length and loss-coef as it includes all loss contributions including possible lumped loss due to imperfect fiber splices, and connector losses. In case total-loss cannot be measured (no power measurement in place), it should not be reported```."



issue#153 * https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/153 Adding guideline for DGE representation
 
There is the last update from Dieter addressing Gert’s comment https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/153#issuecomment-1948098366

During the meeting the text was slightly modified for Gert's suggestion. 
This is the new text:
"```Multi-band amplifiers like the dual-band amplifier depicted in
Figure 6 have a band-separating filter at the input and a band-combining multiplexer combining all the bands at the output. This filter and multiplexer functions are not modeled explicitly and their optical impairments are subsumed in the optical impairments of the amplifier components.```"

https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/145 Update Security Considerations

The proposed text by Dan/Sergio has been incorporated by Dieter in the draft . 
-the model is read-only
-we need to add a sentence at the beginning of I-D, a text explaining that the network instance of OI in this version is containing only RO data nodes

-need to analyze the model where we need update list with proper key to permit to move data node form RO to RW in the future. (added issue#167 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/167 )


issue#144 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/144

Tom Petch comments

Aihua asked some clarifications about the 3R model coming form the attempt to use the same grouping also in wdm-tunnel model.

The first question was related on how we can distinguish if the 3R is modeled with a back2back configuration and so in a bidirectional configuration or in a cross-regen configuration that means each transponder is operated in unidirectionalmode. 

The model permits to have this information with supported-3r-mode.

The second question was on how to understand on which link the 3R is active. The request from Aihua was to have the set of information encompassed in a single point (e.g. grouping) not spread in the model.

About the second question to understand which degree is related to 3R LLC is need to be verified and OTSi incoming and outgoing.

Dieter asked to Aihua to read the 3R related section in the I-D and check if and how the text could be improved.
The problem is how to help implmenters when the information needed are not concentrated and easy to be retrieved.

Gert asked about "transparency" related to wdm-tunnel and 3r functionality. The re are parameters like e.g. trace-identifier that are not L0 but surely in case of 3R need to be considered as L1 . Again this topic is related to L0-L1 boundary.  

