# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (February 13th,2024)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [] Esther Lerouzic 
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [x] Yuji Tochio
- [x] Enrico Griseri 
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [x] Roberto Manzotti --> partially
- [] Daniel King
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [] Reza Rokui 

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists, making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis

#### Issue #21 "Review otu-type identities"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/21

**AP: @Aihua: to verify with Haomian if these otu identities are needed and where they are defined (some, but not all, are defined in G.Sup43)**

### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology



### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis 

**PR#89 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/pull/89 merged to the master branch**


### Next calls

February 20th, 2pm CET

 
### Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### #153  "Adding guideline for DGE representation"  
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/153

YANG update has been already addressed in the context of PR#160
On the base text proposed by Roberto and Italo, an editorial refined version  has been proposed by Dieter for agreement 


#### #145 "Update Security Considerations"

About security is still open the discussion about the rw vs. ro data nodes.
To summarize the issue , in the text proposed for security it is stated that the data nodes in the YANG module are not writable , are readable only.
Gert observed that a couple of data nodes "protection-type" and "inter-layer-sequance-number" are rw. Gert suggested we should consider our OI topology model as "information-source-entry" in RFC8795 representing readable topology information while RFC8795 is also able to modify data nodes adding links/nodes , obtaining a combination of the real topology and what if something is added in the model. 
As stated in the previous meeting we have kept some data nodes as rw for consistency with RFC8795.
The topology models have been defined as rw to support other UCs where the topology information can be written by the client applications and we have defined the LTP protection-type as rw to be consistent with the link-protection-type attribute defined in RFC8795 that we are using to report OMS protection configuration
Both Esther and Italo commented that there are use cases that could justify to have e.g. protection-type rw.
If it is possible to modify protection-type for OMS protection it should also be possible to modify protection-type for OTSi protection using the augmented data node in our OI topology model. This would be a use case justifying the possibility to use writable data nodes also in our topology model, independently of RFC8795.



### Discussion

Agenda for today :
-	Proposed refined text for issue#153 by Dieter and Roberto  https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/153#issuecomment-1935916125

Gert rememebered that last week he underlined that in case of parallel multi-band amplifiers an additional splitter/combiner element needs to be modeled.
2 possible options:
1. Model them explicitly as a part of the OMS-element
2. Model them implicitly by considering their effect on the NF and gain of the amplifiers (one for each band)

The group think that the section where we will put this text would be also a good place where the 2nd option reported above can be properly documented in the I-D text.
AP already exist to add the related piece of text. (Dieter/Sergio)

-	Issue#86 : Proposed splitting of the  “common-transceiver-configured-param” grouping into two - one for r/w the other for r/o attributes 

The group agrees to make the splitting. A new pull request is required in both RFC9093-bis and OI 

-	Issue#145: RW or RO issue on the proposed security text

For security consideration the easy way to proceed is to put everything in RO . For YANG prospective we should consider some effort e.g. having a key for RO lists is not required but having a key for RW lists is mandatory and adding a key to an existing list does not look like a BC change according to RFC7950. 
Dieter suggest to put all in RO, save effort for security and postpone the YANG effort to move from RO to RW for a future version.
It is suggested to put, at the beginning of I-D, a text explaining that the network instance of OI in this version is containing only RO data nodes.


### Post-meeting note

Regarding the first point in agenda and then the AP @Dieter/Sergio to add a proper sentence to describe the Option 2 above,
please consider the text proposed in the comment under issue#153 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/153#issuecomment-1948098366
```
```"Multi-band amplifiers like the dual-band amplifier depicted in
   Figure 6 have a band-separating filter at the input and a combiner
   combining all the bands at the output.  These functions are not
   modeled explicitly and their optical impairments are subsumed in the
   optical impairments of the amplifier components."``````



