# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (February 15th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [] Yuji Tochio
- []Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat



## Discussion


### Review APs (action point) 

#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: ON GOING
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

To be addressed in the new version update for IETF 113. 

#### AP on discovery: AP @Italo  to add specific issue to clarify how the link between external shelf and ROADM is discovered
##### status: ON GOING

Italo said he will add the issue by this week.


### issues on agenda
 

#### issue#101 :Replace OMS/OTS link with OMS/OTS Media Channel Group (see: ITU-T Recommendations G.872 and G.807
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/101

Related to this issue, Dieter shown the text he prepared to be added in the draft.
There were some comments in the github.
In particular the figure 2 of the draft was analyzed.

Gert asked where the LTP should be put, between ROADM and PA or where.
Aihua:suggested that OMS-MCG should be represented as TE-link 
There was a general agreement to refine a bit the picture to be more aligned with the new terminology introduced (WDT-TE-node etc.) 
and the proposed text about OMS/OTS-MCG

AP: Dieter to refine the text and figure 2 of the draft based on received comments.
#### status: done

**Dieter updated text/figure addressing both open issues**
#101 and #26 :Terminology: being explicit about ROADM

see https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/commit/53daa05f9eea98bc47f601bf43f8c6596ada8434

Gert pointed out a couple of inconsistencies in the text to be fixed. Basically:
old text> An OMS MCG can be decomposed into a sequence of OTS MCGs of type (i),(ii), and (iii) as listed above.
new text> An OMS MCG can be decomposed into a sequence of OTS MCGs of type (i),(ii), and (iii) as listed above and amplifiers.

old text> For the sake of optical impairment modeling, an OMS MCG can also be decomposed into a sequence of elements such as BA, fiber section, ILA, concentrated loss, and PA.
new text> An OMS MCG can also be decomposed into a sequence of elements such as BA, fiber section, ILA, concentrated loss, and PA. 

For the rest no other comments on the proposed text/figure. 

#### issue#102 : copropagating raman
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/102

AP: @Esther to check with TIP experts if in the case of co-propagation it is enough to report the gain.The power pump can be part of specification in the type-variety.

Esther feedback from TIP: it is sure that reporting gain is not enough. Not totally clear if power-pump has to be per instance or implicit in type-variety.
There is operator in TIP/MUST with mechanism enabling to retrieve pump-power. TIP want to check with this operator how is the procedure.
GNPy is computing the pump-power based on gain measure.
There was some discussion about pump-power implicit in type-variety vs. explicit pum-power attribute to be added in the model.

It was decided to add pump-power and related frequency attributes.
Italo asked if these two attributes would be needed just for co-propagating RAMAN and if type-variety attribute would be sufficient to distingush between the co-porpagating and counter-propagating.
Esther said that there are information in type-variety providing implicit indication of the type of RAMAN.

Dieter said that in general to have "explicit" information is better.
The agreement was to add also "direction" attribute as described 
in Gert's comment https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/102#issue-1126058417

AP @Esther: to check with PoliTO at TIP-OOPT-PSE WG possible description of pump-power and frequency.

#### issue#38 do we have a crisp definition at which point in frequency the tilt/gain pair applies? 
i.e. need to define a point and a slope. If it can't be defined in the description, another parameter would need to be added.

We agree to use this definition to define at which point in frequency the tilt/gain pair applies:  
Tilt: tilt is defined between lower and upper frequency of the amplifier definition.
This definition has to be put in the YANG description of tilt-target attibute.
The issue is closed. 

####  issue#103 Alignment with layer0-types-ext update 

Added this new issue to keep track of the needed alignment with layer0-types-ext module that has to be imported in the model.

## next meeting: February 22th 2022
