# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology weekly (January 25th,2022)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [x] Aihua Guo
- [x] Esther Lerouzic
- [X] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [X] Gert Grammel
- [] Gabriele Galimberti
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [X]Enrico Griseri
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [x] Igor Bryskin
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- []Jan Kundrat



## Discussion

### Review APs (action point) 

#### AP OTSi global unique identification: Dieter to propose text
##### status: ON GOING
##### issue #88 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/88

To be addressed in the new version update for IETF 113. 

#### AP on discovery: AP @Italo  to add specific issue to clarify how the link between external shelf and ROADM is discovered
##### status: ON GOING

Italo said he will add the issue by this week.

#### AP for empty type:AP @sergio,Italo and Esther: to provide text clarification about the usage of "empty" type for optional" attribute
##### status:CLOSED 
This is the final text agreed during the meeting:
"If the value of a mandatory attribute is unknown, it MUST be reported using the "empty" type.
If an optional attribute is applicable but its value is unknown it MUST be reported using the "empty" type.
If an optional attribute is not applicable to an entity it MUST be omitted (not be present in the datastore)."
This text will be added in the description section of the module in the YANG model.

### issues on agenda

#### issue#99 "Use union type with empty type to enable "[null]" correct answer in case a mandatory data is not available" https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/99

The issue has been discussed, solution is agreed and the issue will be closed with the next PR before IETF 113.

Decision from previous meeting (January 18th):

It was agreed:
* to introduce the empty type for most of the attribute.
* Add it everywhere when is possible and discuss if there are few exceptions (e.g. not for the keys in the list) 
* AP @sergio,Italo and Esther: to provide text clarification about the usage of "empty" type for optional" attribute
```
type union {
  type decimal64;  // omitting range and fractional digits
  type empty;
}
```

#### issue#100 "Add more line-coding identities" https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/100

Decision from previous meeting (January 18th):

It was agreed:
* to introduce a new attribute just for bit rate >= 100G i.e. 100G,200G,300G,400G
* When we need more than line rate (e.g. modulation format) we will use line coding and in this case we can provide just the standard ones.
* Since the line-coding is an identity, vendors can define the identities for their own proprietary line-coding definitions.
* The attendees agree to consider the model as managing coherent NW only.

https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/98 and 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/97

The two issues are strictly connected seems both are  related to the choice in the model to have penalties related to the combination of chromatic dispersion (CD) and polarization mode dispersion (PMD) and not separated .
Eshter reported the situation in TIP MUST in which the decision was in GNPY do not follow this triplet option and also for OpenConfig extension.
We should find a scientific work to demonstrate the validity of our choice: this solution provides more accurancy and is more future safe.
Keep the model as it is for the moment waiting a couple of weeks  to give the opportunity to look for the publication and then we can decide eventually 
to come back to separated value.
No need to add specific text for the moment.

https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/87

This issue is present for a while and has been open to raise the need to have a relation between OTSiG and tunnel identifier.
People expressed opinion that optical impairments topology is not particulary impacted by this issue and agree to move this issue to flexgrid tunnel model.

https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/26

Terminology: being explicit about ROADM
On the market, the term "ROADM" may refer to a device including or excluding OTs, depending on the context. Being more explicit may be a way to avoid this ambiguity between the optical switching block and the fully equipped device.
A lot of names to distinguish the ROADM with OTs embedded or not have been proposed.
Dieter pointed out to base our definition on ITU-T reference 
https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.672-202010-I/en

AP @Julien,Gert : to recap in a definite proposal the discussion


## next meeting: February 1st 2022
