# YANG model for Optical Impairment aware Topology week (April 9th,2024)


****Attendees****
- [x] Dieter Beller
- [] Aihua Guo
- [] Esther Lerouzic 
- [x] Julien Meuric
- [x] Italo Busi
- [x] Gert Grammel
- [x] Gabriele Galimberti 
- [] Yuji Tochio
- [] Enrico Griseri 
- [x] Sergio Belotti
- [x] Roberto Manzotti 
- [x] Nigel Davis
- [] Daniel King
- [] Victor Lopez
- [] Haomian Zheng
- [] Igor Bryskin
- [] Dirk Schroetter
- [] Brent Foster
- [] Jiang Sun (CMCC)
- [] Jan Kundrat
- [] Eliana Vercelli
- [] Jonathan Sadler
- [] Reza Rokui 
- [] Scott Mansfield

## Admin

### Review APs (action point) Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

#### issue #124 "*Remove key from media channel list*"
related to flexi-n value there is agreement to go ahead to delete the key statements from the media-channel-group/media-channel lists,
making the flexi-n attribute optional.
A possible issue without key is to have more elements with the same flexi-n and we cannot have 2 media-channel with the same flexi-n.

**AP: Italo/Aihua** to have a look to possible YANG statement (e.g.unique statement) to overcome the issue

Need to make some json examples and make the validation with yanglint.
You cannot have two media channel in the same media channel group with the same flexi-n. See figure 5 in section 2.3.4

       +--ro media-channel-groups!
       |  +--ro media-channel-group* [i]
       |     +--ro i                 int16
       |     +--ro media-channels* []
       |        +--ro flexi-n?          l0-types:flexi-n
       |        +--ro flexi-m?          l0-types:flexi-m

Need to check if "unique" statement is still valid when flexi-n is not present.
Esther: flexi-n if it exists must be unique in the media-channel-group upper level list.


### Review APs (action point) RFC9093-bis


### Closed Issues Optical Impairment Topology


### Closed Issues RFC9093-bis 

### Next calls

April 16th

 


### Discussion

#### Optical Impairment Topology YANG model

##### issue #145 Update Security Consideration https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/145

Security Consideration has been added to the I-D with PR#170 before IETF-119.
One comment form Italo https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/pull/170#discussion_r1511415728 sent 
after the merging date is still open and been reviewed during the meeting.
There was agreement to follow re-wording suggested by Italo. The changes will be incorporated for next version. 

##### issue #169 I-D text update describing how to use the total-loss attribute for the fiber OMS element
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/169

Also this text has been already added to I-D with PR#170, but one comment from Italo is till pending
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/issues/169#issuecomment-1978758921

The suggestions from Italo have been reviewed and accepted. 
In case of fiber cut a specific text has been agreed:
"the measured loss can change overtime due to the changes of fiber condition e.g. fiber cut"

Since the attribute "total-loss" is mandatory but it should be optional, also a YANG update will be needed.

#### RFC9093-bis 

##### issue #81  Boundary between Layer 0 and Layer 1 https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/ietf-ccamp-layer0-types-ext-RFC9093-bis/issues/81

This issue is the only one in RFC9093-bis that is still needed to be discussed.
Some slides from Italo, uploaded in GITHUB at 
https://github.com/ietf-ccamp-wg/draft-ietf-ccamp-optical-impairment-topology-yang/files/8255504/layer0-boundary-01.pptx, have been reviewed.
Slide 1 provides a summary of what is the context of the issue with some process like e.g. inverse multiplexing, FEC, 
that are in the middle between Optical domain (L0) and Digital domain (L1/L2).

Gert observed that the "layering" shown in the slides can be different depending of we consider "ITU-T" data plane view or a control plane view.
We should make the analysis considering control plane view.
Slide 2 presents a 10x10 GE E2E scenario between two muxponder. For the E2E WDM tunnel prospective some not-L0 parameters should impact
the service E2E interworking like e.g. which type of multiplexing is done, the client framing adoption etc. 
Italo asked to have specific information related to ZR+ context and maybe an example made with ZR+.

Roberto took the action to look at MSA official documentation to report information summary.







